--- PAGE 1 ---
CATHOLIC
SUNDAY READINGS
Formatted to fit on a single page.

--- PAGE 2 ---
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Text copyright 1998, 1997, 1970 by Confraternity
of Christian Doctrine, Washington, D.C. All rights
reserved. Reprinted with permission. Permission is
granted to the United States military to reprint the
Sunday Readings for Catholic personnel deployed
outside the United States in support of Operation
Enduring Freedom and Operation Iraqi Freedom.
The text may not be reproduced or transmitted in
any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical,
including photocopying, recording, or by an
information storage and retrieval system, without
permission in writing from the copyright owner.
The English translation of some Psalm responses,
some Alleluia and Gospel verses and the Lenten
Gospel Acclamations from the Lectionary for Mass
copyright 1968, 1981, 1997, International
Committee on English in the Liturgy, Inc.,
Washington D.C. All rights reserved.
The poetic English translation of the sequences of
the Roman Missal are taken from the Roman Missal
approved by the National Conference of Catholic
Bishops of the United States, copyright 1964 by the
National Catholic Welfare Conference, Inc. All
rights reserved.
-i-

--- PAGE 3 ---
CONTENTS
With few exceptions, the Sunday Readings are formatted to fit on a SINGLE PAGE:
— C, 9 = Denotes Cycle C readings found on page 9
— ABC, 9 = Denotes readings are identical for Cycles A, B, C
— ABC (2 pages), 9 = Denotes exception to single page for Sunday Readings
For Sundays with READING(S) OPTIONS that exceed one page—where
possible—options are given in sequence to permit one-page-per-Sunday:
— C (2 pages), 9 = Includes all optional readings
(cid:1)
— C, (w/ 1st Reading Option A only), 11 = Denotes text option as described
(cid:1)
— C, (w/ 1st Reading Option B only), 12
EXCEPTIONS to Sunday Readings on a single page: Palm (Passion) Sunday, Good
Friday, Easter Vigil, and Corpus Christi. In addition, the Christmas Vigil (Cycles ABC),
the 3rd, 4th and 5th Sundays of Lent (Cycle A); and the 24th Sunday in Ordinary Time
(Cycle C) are two pages if the longer form of the Gospel is used. All Souls (November 2)
is the only Mass in which there are options for all readings.
PAGE NUMBERS are given in Adobe Acrobat Reader.
SEASON OF ADVENT
1st Sunday of Advent — Year A, page 15
— B, 16
— C, 17
2nd Sunday of Advent — A, 18
-ii-

--- PAGE 4 ---
— B, 19
— C, 20
3rd Sunday of Advent — A, 21
— B, 22
— C, 23
4th Sunday of Advent — A, 24
— B, 25
— C, 26
SEASON OF CHRISTMAS
Christmas (Vigil) — ABC, 27
— ABC (2 pages), 28
(cid:1)
— ABC (w/ shorter form of Gospel only), 30
Christmas (Midnight) — ABC, 31
Christmas (Dawn) — ABC, 32
Christmas (Day) — ABC, 33
Holy Family — A, 34
— B, 35
— C, 36
— B (Optional readings for Year B), 37
— C (Optional readings for Year C), 38
Epiphany — ABC, 39
2nd Sunday after Christmas — ABC, 40
-iii-

--- PAGE 5 ---
Baptism of the Lord — ABC, 41
— B (Optional readings for Year B), 41
— C (Optional readings for Year B), 43
SEASON OF LENT
Ash Wednesday — ABC, 44
1st Sunday of Lent — A, 45
— B, 46
— C, 47
2nd Sunday of Lent — A, 48
— B, 49
— C, 50
3rd Sunday of Lent — A (2 pages), 51
(cid:1)
— A, (w/ shorter form of Gospel only), 53
— B, 54
— C, 55
4th Sunday of Lent — A (2 pages), 56
(cid:1)
— A (w/ shorter form of Gospel only), 58
— B, 59
— C, 60
5th Sunday of Lent — A (2 pages), 61
(cid:1)
— A (w/ shorter form of Gospel only), 63
— B, 64
-iv-

--- PAGE 6 ---
— C, 65
Palm (Passion) Sunday — A (4 pages), 66
— B (4 pages), 70
— C (4 pages), 74
EASTER TRIDUUM
and SEASON OF EASTER
Holy Thursday — ABC, 78
Good Friday — ABC (4 pages), 79
Holy Saturday (Easter Vigil) — ABC (8 pages), 83
Easter (Day) — ABC, 91
2d Sunday of Easter — A, 92
— B, 93
— C, 94
3rd Sunday of Easter — A, 95
— B, 96
— C, 97
4th Sunday of Easter — A, 98
— B, 99
— C, 100
5th Sunday of Easter — A, 101
— B, 102
— C, 103
6th Sunday of Easter — A, 104
-v-

--- PAGE 7 ---
— B, 105
— C, 106
Ascension — A, 107
— B, 108
— C, 109
7th Sunday of Easter — A, 110
— B, 111
— C, 112
Pentecost Sunday (Vigil) — ABC (2 pages), 113
(cid:1)
— ABC (w/ 1st Reading Option A only), 115
(cid:1)
— ABC (w/ 1st Reading Option B only), 116
(cid:1)
— ABC (w/ 1st Reading Option C only), 117
(cid:1)
— ABC (w/ 1st Reading Option D only), 118
Pentecost Sunday (Day) — A, 119
— B (2 pages), 120
(cid:1)
— B (w/ 2nd Reading Option A, Gospel A only), 122
(cid:1)
— B (w/ 2nd Reading Option A, Gospel B only), 123
(cid:1)
— B (w/ 2nd Reading Option B, Gospel A only), 124
(cid:1)
— B (w/ 2nd Reading Option B, Gospel B only), 125
— C (2 pages), 126
(cid:1)
— C (w/ 2nd Reading Option A, Gospel A only), 128
(cid:1)
— C (w/ 2nd Reading Option A, Gospel B only), 129
(cid:1)
-vi-

--- PAGE 8 ---
— C (w/ 2nd Reading Option B, Gospel A only), 130
(cid:1)
— C (w/ 2nd Reading Option B, Gospel B only), 131
ORDINARY TIME
2nd Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 132
— B, 133
— C, 134
3rd Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 135
— B, 136
— C, 137
4th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 138
— B, 139
— C, 140
5th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 141
— B, 142
— C, 143
6th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 144
— B, 145
— C, 146
7th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 147
— B, 148
— C, 149
8th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 150
-vii-

--- PAGE 9 ---
— B, 151
— C, 152
9th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 153
— B, 154
— C, 155
10th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 156
— B, 157
— C, 158
11th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 159
— B, 160
— C, 161
12th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 162
— B, 163
— C, 164
13th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 165
— B, 166
— C, 167
14th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 168
— B, 169
— C, 170
15th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 171
— B, 172
-viii-

--- PAGE 10 ---
— C, 173
16th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 174
— B, 175
— C, 176
17th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 177
— B, 178
— C, 179
18th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 180
— B, 181
— C, 182
19th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 183
— B, 184
— C, 185
20th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 186
— B, 187
— C, 188
21st Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 189
— B, 190
— C, 191
22nd Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 192
— B, 193
— C, 194
-ix-

--- PAGE 11 ---
23rd Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 195
— B, 196
— C, 197
24th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 198
— B, 199
— C, 200
(cid:1)
— C (w/ short form of Gospel only), 201
25th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 202
— B, 203
— C, 204
26th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 205
— B, 206
— C, 207
27th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 208
— B, 209
— C, 210
28th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 211
— B, 212
— C, 213
29th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 214
— B, 215
— C, 216
-x-

--- PAGE 12 ---
30th Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 217
— B, 218
— C, 219
31st Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 220
— B, 221
— C, 222
32nd Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 223
— B, 224
— C, 225
33rd Sunday in Ordinary Time — A, 226
— B, 227
— C, 228
34th (or Last) Sunday in
Ordinary Time: Christ the King — A, 229
— B, 230
— C, 231
SOLEMNITIES and FEASTS
Mary, Mother of God
(January 1) — ABC, 232
Presentation of the Lord
(February 2) — ABC, 233
Joseph, Husband of Mary
(March 19) — ABC, 234
Annunciation (March 25) — ABC, 235
-xi-

--- PAGE 13 ---
Holy Trinity (1st Sunday
after Pentecost) — A, 236
— B, 237
— C, 238
Corpus Christi (2nd Sunday
after Pentecost) — A (2 pages), 239
— B (2 pages), 241
— C (2 pages), 243
Sacred Heart of Jesus (Friday
after Corpus Christi) — A, 245
— B, 246
— C, 247
Nativity of John the Baptist
(Vigil) (June 24) — ABC, 248
Nativity of John the Baptist
(Day) (June 24) — ABC, 249
SS. Peter and Paul, Apostles
(Vigil) (June 29) — ABC, 250
SS. Peter and Paul, Apostles
(Day) (June 29) — ABC, 251
Transfiguration (August 6) — A, 252
— B, 253
— C, 254
Assumption (Vigil) (August 15) — ABC, 255
Assumption (Day) (August 15) — ABC, 256
-xii-

--- PAGE 14 ---
Exaltation of the Holy Cross
(September 14) — ABC, 257
All Saints (November 1) — ABC, 258
All Souls (November 2) — ABC (8 pages), 259
Dedication of St. John Lateran
Basilica (November 9) — ABC, 267
Immaculate Conception
(December 8) — ABC, 268
-xiii-

--- PAGE 15 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS BROTHERS and sisters:
FIRST SUNDAY OF ADVENT—A You know the time;
it is the hour now for you to awake from sleep.
For our salvation is nearer now than when we first believed;
FIRST READING (Is 2:1-5) the night is advanced, the day is at hand.
Let us then throw off the works of darkness
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: and put on the armor of light;
let us conduct ourselves properly as in the day,
THIS is what Isaiah, son of Amoz, not in orgies and drunkenness,
saw concerning Judah and Jerusalem. not in promiscuity and lust,
In days to come, not in rivalry and jealousy.
the mountain of the LORD’s house But put on the Lord Jesus Christ,
shall be established as the highest mountain and make no provision for the desires of the flesh.
and raised above the hills.
All nations shall stream toward it; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
many peoples shall come and say:
“Come, let us climb the LORD’s mountain, ALLELUIA (cf. Psalm 85:8)
to the house of the God of Jacob,
that he may instruct us in his ways, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and we may walk in his paths.”
For from Zion shall go forth instruction, Lord, show us your love;
and the word of the LORD from Jerusalem. and grant us your salvation.—R.
He shall judge between the nations,
and impose terms on many peoples. GOSPEL (24:37-44)
They shall beat their swords into plowshares
and their spears into pruning hooks; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
one nation shall not raise the sword against another,
nor shall they train for war again. JESUS said to his disciples:
O house of Jacob, come, “As it was in the days of Noah,
let us walk in the light of the Lord! so it will be at the coming of the Son of Man.
In those days before the flood,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. they were eating and drinking,
marrying and giving in marriage,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 122:1-2, 3-4, 4-5, 6-7, 8-9) up to the day that Noah entered the ark.
They did not know until the flood came and carried them all away.
R. Let us go rejoicing to the house of the Lord. So will it be also at the coming of the Son of Man.
Two men will be out in the field;
I rejoiced because they said to me, one will be taken, and one will be left.
“We will go up to the house of the LORD.” Two women will be grinding at the mill;
And now we have set foot one will be taken, and one will be left.
within your gates, O Jerusalem.—R. Therefore, stay awake!
For you do not know on which day your Lord will come.
Jerusalem, built as a city Be sure of this: if the master of the house
with compact unity. had known the hour of night when the thief was coming,
To it the tribes go up, he would have stayed awake
the tribes of the LORD.—R. and not let his house be broken into.
So too, you also must be prepared,
According to the decree for Israel, for at an hour you do not expect, the Son of Man will come.”
to give thanks to the name of the LORD.
In it are set up judgment seats, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
seats for the house of David.—R.
Pray for the peace of Jerusalem!
May those who love you prosper!
May peace be within your walls,
prosperity in your buildings.—R.
Because of my brothers and friends
I will say, “Peace be within you!”
Because of the house of the LORD, our God,
I will pray for your good.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 13:11-14)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 16 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS I give thanks to my God always on your account
FIRST SUNDAY OF ADVENT—B for the grace of God bestowed on you in Christ Jesus,
that in him you were enriched in every way,
with all discourse and all knowledge,
FIRST READING (Is 63:16b-17, 19b; 64:2-7) as the testimony to Christ was confirmed among you,
so that you are not lacking in any spiritual gift
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: as you wait for the revelation of our Lord Jesus Christ.
He will keep you firm to the end,
YOU, Lord, are our father, irreproachable on the day of our Lord Jesus Christ.
our redeemer you are named forever. God is faithful,
Why do you let us wander, O Lord, from your ways, and by him you were called to fellowship with his Son,
and harden our hearts so that we fear you not? Jesus Christ our Lord.
Return for the sake of your servants,
the tribes of your heritage. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Oh, that you would rend the heavens and come down,
with the mountains quaking before you, ALLELUIA (Psalm 85:8)
while you wrought awesome deeds we could not hope for,
such as they had not heard of from of old. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
No ear has ever heard, no eye ever seen, any God but you
doing such deeds for those who wait for him. Show us Lord, your love;
Would that you might meet us doing right, and grant us your salvation.—R.
that we were mindful of you in our ways!
Behold, you are angry, and we are sinful; GOSPEL (Mk 13:33-37)
all of us have become like unclean people,
all our good deeds are like polluted rags; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
we have all withered like leaves,
and our guilt carries us away like the wind. JESUS said to his disciples:
There is none who calls upon your name, “Be watchful! Be alert!
who rouses himself to cling to you; You do not know when the time will come.
for you have hidden your face from us It is like a man traveling abroad.
and have delivered us up to our guilt. He leaves home and places his servants in charge,
Yet, O Lord, you are our father; each with his own work,
we are the clay and you the potter: and orders the gatekeeper to be on the watch.
we are all the work of your hands. Watch, therefore;
you do not know when the Lord of the house is coming,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. whether in the evening, or at midnight,
or at cockcrow, or in the morning.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 80:2-3, 15-16, 18-19) May he not come suddenly and find you sleeping.
What I say to you, I say to all: “Watch!”
R. (4) Lord, make us turn to you;
let us see your face and we shall be saved. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
O shepherd of Israel, hearken,
from your throne upon the cherubim, shine forth.
Rouse your power,
and come to save us.—R.
Once again, O Lord of hosts,
look down from heaven, and see;
take care of this vine,
and protect what your right hand has planted
the son of man whom you yourself made strong.—R.
May your help be with the man of your right hand,
with the son of man whom you yourself made strong.
Then we will no more withdraw from you;
give us new life, and we will call upon your name.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 1:3-9)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 17 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Show us, Lord, your love;
FIRST SUNDAY OF ADVENT—C and grant us your salvation.—R.
GOSPEL (Lk 21:25-28, 34-36)
FIRST READING (Jer 33:14-16)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah:
JESUS said to his disciples:
THE days are coming, says the Lord, “There will be signs in the sun, the moon, and the stars,
when I will fulfill the promise and on earth nations will be in dismay,
I made to the house of Israel and Judah. perplexed by the roaring of the sea and the waves.
In those days, in that time, People will die of fright
I will raise up for David a just shoot ; in anticipation of what is coming upon the world,
he shall do what is right and just in the land. for the powers of the heavens will be shaken.
In those days Judah shall be safe And then they will see the Son of Man
and Jerusalem shall dwell secure; coming in a cloud with power and great glory.
this is what they shall call her: But when these signs begin to happen,
“The Lord our justice.” stand erect and raise your heads
because your redemption is at hand.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
“Beware that your hearts do not become drowsy
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 25:4-5, 8-9, 10, 14) from carousing and drunkenness
and the anxieties of daily life,
R. (1b) To you, O Lord, I lift my soul. and that day catch you by surprise like a trap.
For that day will assault everyone
Your ways, O Lord, make known to me; who lives on the face of the earth.
teach me your paths, Be vigilant at all times
Guide me in your truth and teach me, and pray that you have the strength
for you are God my savior, to escape the tribulations that are imminent
and for you I wait all the day.—R. and to stand before the Son of Man.”
Good and upright is the Lord; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
thus he shows sinners the way.
He guides the humble to justice,
and teaches the humble his way.—R.
All the paths of the Lord are kindness and constancy
toward those who keep his covenant and his decrees.
The friendship of the Lord is with those who fear him,
and his covenant, for their instruction.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Thes 3:12-4:2)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
May the Lord make you increase and abound in love
for one another and for all,
just as we have for you,
so as to strengthen your hearts,
to be blameless in holiness before our God and Father
at the coming of our Lord Jesus with all his holy ones. Amen.
Finally, brothers and sisters,
we earnestly ask and exhort you in the Lord Jesus that,
as you received from us
how you should conduct yourselves to please God
—and as you are conducting yourselves—
you do so even more.
For you know what instructions we gave you through the Lord Jesus.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Psalm 85:8)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 18 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS BROTHERS and sisters:
SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT—A Whatever was written previously was written for our instruction,
that by endurance and by the encouragement of the Scriptures
we might have hope.
FIRST READING (Is 11:1-10) May the God of endurance and encouragement
grant you to think in harmony with one another,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: in keeping with Christ Jesus,
that with one accord you may with one voice
ON that day, a shoot shall sprout from the stump of Jesse, glorify the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ.
and from his roots a bud shall blossom. Welcome one another, then, as Christ welcomed you,
The spirit of the Lord shall rest upon him: for the glory of God.
a spirit of wisdom and of understanding, For I say that Christ became a minister of the circumcised
a spirit of counsel and of strength, to show God’s truthfulness,
a spirit of knowledge and of fear of the Lord, to confirm the promises to the patriarchs,
and his delight shall be the fear of the Lord. but so that the Gentiles might glorify God for his mercy.
Not by appearance shall he judge, As it is written:
nor by hearsay shall he decide, Therefore, I will praise you among the Gentiles
but he shall judge the poor with justice, and sing praises to your name.
and decide aright for the land’s afflicted.
He shall strike the ruthless with the rod of his mouth, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and with the breath of his lips he shall slay the wicked.
Justice shall be the band around his waist, ALLELUIA (Luke 3:4, 6)
and faithfulness a belt upon his hips.
Then the wolf shall be a guest of the lamb, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and the leopard shall lie down with the kid;
the calf and the young lion shall browse together, Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths:
with a little child to guide them. all flesh shall see the salvation of God.—R.
The cow and the bear shall be neighbors,
together their young shall rest; GOSPEL (Mt 3:1-12)
the lion shall eat hay like the ox.
The baby shall play by the cobra’s den, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
and the child lay his hand on the adder’s lair.
There shall be no harm or ruin on all my holy mountain; JOHN the Baptist appeared, preaching in the desert of Judea
for the earth shall be filled with knowledge of the Lord, and saying, “Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand!”
as water covers the sea. It was of him that the prophet Isaiah had spoken when he said:
On that day, the root of Jesse, A voice of one crying out in the desert,
set up as a signal for the nations, Prepare the way of the Lord,
the Gentiles shall seek out, make straight his paths.
for his dwelling shall be glorious. John wore clothing made of camel’s hair
and had a leather belt around his waist.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. His food was locusts and wild honey.
At that time Jerusalem, all Judea,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 72:1-2, 7-8, 12-13, 17) and the whole region around the Jordan
were going out to him
R. (cf. 7) Justice shall flourish in his time, and fullness of peace for ever. and were being baptized by him in the Jordan River
as they acknowledged their sins.
O God, with your judgment endow the king,
and with your justice, the king’s son; When he saw many of the Pharisees and Sadducees
he shall govern your people with justice coming to his baptism, he said to them, “You brood of vipers!
and your afflicted ones with judgment.—R. Who warned you to flee from the coming wrath?
Produce good fruit as evidence of your repentance.
Justice shall flower in his days, And do not presume to say to yourselves,
and profound peace, till the moon be no more. ‘We have Abraham as our father.’
May he rule from sea to sea, For I tell you,
and from the River to the ends of the earth.—R. God can raise up children to Abraham from these stones.
Even now the ax lies at the root of the trees.
For he shall rescue the poor when he cries out, Therefore every tree that does not bear good fruit
and the afflicted when he has no one to help him. will be cut down and thrown into the fire.
He shall have pity for the lowly and the poor; I am baptizing you with water, for repentance,
the lives of the poor he shall save.—R. but the one who is coming after me is mightier than I.
I am not worthy to carry his sandals.
May his name be blessed forever; He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
as long as the sun his name shall remain. His winnowing fan is in his hand.
In him shall all the tribes of the earth be blessed; He will clear his threshing floor
all the nations shall proclaim his happiness.—R. and gather his wheat into his barn,
but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.”
SECOND READING (Rom 15:4-9)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 19 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (2 Pt 3:8-14)
SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT—B
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Peter
FIRST READING (Is 40:1-5, 9-11) DO not ignore this one fact, beloved,
that with the Lord one day is like a thousand years
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: and a thousand years like one day.
The Lord does not delay his promise, as some regard “delay,”
COMFORT, give comfort to my people, but he is patient with you,
says your God. not wishing that any should perish
Speak tenderly to Jerusalem, and proclaim to her but that all should come to repentance.
that her service is at an end, But the day of the Lord will come like a thief,
her guilt is expiated; and then the heavens will pass away with a mighty roar
indeed, she has received from the hand of the LORD and the elements will be dissolved by fire,
double for all her sins. and the earth and everything done on it will be found out.
A voice cries out: Since everything is to be dissolved in this way,
In the desert prepare the way of the LORD! what sort of persons ought you to be,
Make straight in the wasteland a highway for our God! conducting yourselves in holiness and devotion,
Every valley shall be filled in, waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God,
every mountain and hill shall be made low; because of which the heavens will be dissolved in flames
the rugged land shall be made a plain, and the elements melted by fire.
the rough country, a broad valley. But according to his promise
Then the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, we await new heavens and a new earth
and all people shall see it together; in which righteousness dwells.
for the mouth of the LORD has spoken. Therefore, beloved, since you await these things,
be eager to be found without spot or blemish before him, at peace.
Go up on to a high mountain,
Zion, herald of glad tidings; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
cry out at the top of your voice,
Jerusalem, herald of good news! ALLELUIA (Luke 3:4, 6)
Fear not to cry out
and say to the cities of Judah: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Here is your God!
Here comes with power Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths:
the Lord GOD, all flesh shall see the salvation of God.—R.
who rules by his strong arm;
here is his reward with him, GOSPEL (Mk 1:1-8)
his recompense before him.
Like a shepherd he feeds his flock; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
in his arms he gathers the lambs,
carrying them in his bosom, THE beginning of the gospel of Jesus Christ the Son of God:
and leading the ewes with care.
As it is written in Isaiah the prophet:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Behold, I am sending my messenger ahead of you;
he will prepare your way.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 85:9-10-11-12, 13-14) A voice of one crying out in the desert:
“Prepare the way of the Lord,
R. (8) Lord, let us see your kindness, and grant us your salvation. make straight his paths.”
John the Baptist appeared in the desert
I will hear what God proclaims; proclaiming a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins.
the Lord — for he proclaims peace to his people. People of the whole Judean countryside
Near indeed is his salvation to those who fear him, and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem
glory dwelling in our land.—R. were going out to him
and were being baptized by him in the Jordan River
Kindness and truth shall meet; as they acknowledged their sins.
justice and peace shall kiss. John was clothed in camel’s hair,
Truth shall spring out of the earth, with a leather belt around his waist.
and justice shall look down from heaven.—R. He fed on locusts and wild honey.
And this is what he proclaimed:
The Lord himself will give his benefits; “One mightier than I is coming after me.
our land shall yield its increase. I am not worthy to stoop and loosen the thongs of his sandals.
Justice shall walk before him, I have baptized you with water;
and prepare the way of his steps.—R. he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 20 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS BROTHERS and sisters:
SECOND SUNDAY OF ADVENT—C I pray always with joy in my every prayer for all of you,
because of your partnership for the gospel
from the first day until now.
FIRST READING (Bar 5:1-9) I am confident of this,
that the one who began a good work in you
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Baruch: will continue to complete it
until the day of Christ Jesus.
JERUSALEM, take off your robe of mourning and misery; God is my witness,
put on the splendor of glory from God forever: how I long for all of you with the affection of Christ Jesus.
wrapped in the cloak of justice from God, And this is my prayer:
bear on your head the mitre that your love may increase ever more and more
that displays the glory of the eternal name. in knowledge and every kind of perception,
For God will show all the earth your splendor: to discern what is of value,
you will be named by God forever so that you may be pure and blameless for the day of Christ,
the peace of justice, the glory of God’s worship. filled with the fruit of righteousness
that comes through Jesus Christ
Up, Jerusalem! stand upon the heights; for the glory and praise of God.
look to the east and see your children
gathered from the east and the west The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
at the word of the Holy One,
rejoicing that they are remembered by God. ALLELUIA (Luke 3:4, 6)
Led away on foot by their enemies they left you:
but God will bring them back to you R. Alleluia, alleluia.
borne aloft in glory as on royal thrones.
For God has commanded Prepare the way of the Lord, make straight his paths:
that every lofty mountain be made low, all flesh shall see the salvation of God.—R.
and that the age-old depths and gorges
be filled to level ground, GOSPEL (Lk 3:1-6)
that Israel may advance secure in the glory of God.
The forests and every fragrant kind of tree + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
have overshadowed Israel at God’s command;
for God is leading Israel in joy IN the fifteenth year of the reign of Tiberius Caesar,
by the light of his glory, when Pontius Pilate was governor of Judea,
with his mercy and justice for company. and Herod was tetrarch of Galilee,
and his brother Philip tetrarch of the region
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. of Ituraea and Trachonitis,
and Lysanias was tetrarch of Abilene,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 126:1-2, 2-3, 4-5, 6) during the high priesthood of Annas and Caiaphas,
the word of God came to John the son of Zechariah in the desert.
R. (3) The Lord has done great things for us; we are filled with joy. John went throughout the whole region of the Jordan,
proclaiming a baptism of repentance for the forgiveness of sins,
When the Lord brought back the captives of Zion, as it is written in the book of the words of the prophet Isaiah:
we were like men dreaming. A voice of one crying out in the desert:
Then our mouth was filled with laughter, “Prepare the way of the Lord,
and our tongue with rejoicing.—R. make straight his paths.
Every valley shall be filled
Then they said among the nations, and every mountain and hill shall be made low.
“The Lord has done great things for them.” The winding roads shall be made straight,
The Lord has done great things for us; and the rough ways made smooth,
we are glad indeed.—R. and all flesh shall see the salvation of God.”
Restore our fortunes, O Lord, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
like the torrents in the southern desert.
Those who sow in tears
shall reap rejoicing.—R.
Although they go forth weeping,
carrying the seed to be sown,
They shall come back rejoicing,
carrying their sheaves.—R.
SECOND READING (Phil 1:4-6, 8-11)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians:
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 21 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS until it receives the early and the late rains.
THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT—A You too must be patient.
Make your hearts firm,
because the coming of the Lord is at hand.
FIRST READING (Is 35:1-6a, 10) Do not complain, brothers and sisters, about one another,
that you may not be judged.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: Behold, the Judge is standing before the gates.
Take as an example of hardship and patience, brothers and sisters,
THE desert and the parched land will exult; the prophets who spoke in the name of the Lord.
the steppe will rejoice and bloom.
They will bloom with abundant flowers, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and rejoice with joyful song.
The glory of Lebanon will be given to them, ALLELUIA (Isaiah 61:1, cited in Luke 4:18)
the splendor of Carmel and Sharon;
they will see the glory of the Lord, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
the splendor of our God.
Strengthen the hands that are feeble, The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
make firm the knees that are weak, because he has anointed me
say to those whose hearts are frightened: to bring glad tidings to the poor.—R.
Be strong, fear not!
Here is your God, GOSPEL (Mt 11:2-11)
he comes with vindication;
with divine recompense + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
he comes to save you.
Then will the eyes of the blind be opened, WHEN John the Baptist heard in prison of the works of the Christ,
the ears of the deaf be cleared; he sent his disciples to Jesus with this question,
then will the lame leap like a stag, “Are you the one who is to come,
then the tongue of the mute will sing. or should we look for another?”
Jesus said to them in reply,
Those whom the Lord has ransomed will return “Go and tell John what you hear and see:
and enter Zion singing, the blind regain their sight,
crowned with everlasting joy; the lame walk,
they will meet with joy and gladness, lepers are cleansed,
sorrow and mourning will flee. the deaf hear,
the dead are raised,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and the poor have the good news proclaimed to them.
And blessed is the one who takes no offense at me.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 146:6-7, 8-9, 9-10)
As they were going off,
R. (cf. Isaiah 35:4) Lord, come and save us. Jesus began to speak to the crowds about John,
or: “What did you go out to the desert to see?
R. Alleluia. A reed swayed by the wind?
Then what did you go out to see?
The Lord God keeps faith forever, Someone dressed in fine clothing?
secures justice for the oppressed, Those who wear fine clothing are in royal palaces.
gives food to the hungry. Then why did you go out? To see a prophet?
The Lord sets captives free.—R. Yes, I tell you, and more than a prophet.
This is the one about whom it is written:
The Lord gives sight to the blind; Behold, I am sending my messenger ahead of you;
the Lord raises up those who were bowed down. he will prepare your way before you.
The Lord loves the just; Amen, I say to you,
the Lord protects strangers.—R. among those born of women
there has been none greater than John the Baptist;
The fatherless and the widow he sustains, yet the least in the kingdom of heaven is greater than he.”
but the way of the wicked he thwarts.
The Lord shall reign forever; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
your God, O Zion, through all generations.—R.
SECOND READING (Jas 5:7-10)
A reading from the Letter of Saint James:
BE patient, brothers and sisters,
until the coming of the Lord.
See how the farmer waits for the precious fruit of the earth,
being patient with it
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 22 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Isaiah 61:1, cited in Luke 4:18)
THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT—B
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Is 61:1-2a, 10-11) The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he has anointed me
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: to bring glad tidings to the poor.—R.
THE spirit of the Lord GOD is upon me, GOSPEL (Jn 1:6-8, 19-28)
because the LORD has anointed me;
he has sent me to bring glad tidings to the poor, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
to heal the brokenhearted,
to proclaim liberty to the captives A MAN named John was sent from God.
and release to the prisoners, He came for testimony, to testify to the light,
to announce a year of favor from the LORD so that all might believe through him.
and a day of vindication by our God. He was not the light,
I rejoice heartily in the LORD, but came to testify to the light.
in my God is the joy of my soul;
for he has clothed me with a robe of salvation And this is the testimony of John.
and wrapped me in a mantle of justice, When the Jews from Jerusalem sent priests
like a bridegroom adorned with a diadem, and Levites to him
like a bride bedecked with her jewels. to ask him, “Who are you?”
As the earth brings forth its plants, He admitted and did not deny it,
and a garden makes its growth spring up, but admitted, “I am not the Christ.”
so will the Lord GOD make justice and praise So they asked him,
spring up before all the nations.
“What are you then? Are you Elijah?”
And he said, “I am not.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
“Are you the Prophet?”
He answered, “No.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Luke 1:46-48, 49-50, 53-54)
So they said to him,
“Who are you, so we can give an answer to those who sent us?
R. (Isaiah 61:10b) My soul rejoices in my God.
What do you have to say for yourself?”
He said:
My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord;
“I am the voice of one crying out in the desert,
my spirit rejoices in God my Savior,
“make straight the way of the Lord,”
for he has looked upon his lowly servant.
as Isaiah the prophet said.”
From this day all generations will call me blessed:—R.
Some Pharisees were also sent.
They asked him,
the Almighty has done great things for me,
“Why then do you baptize
and holy is his Name.
if you are not the Christ or Elijah or the Prophet?”
He has mercy on those who fear him
John answered them,
in every generation.—R.
“I baptize with water;
He has filled the hungry with good things, but there is one among you whom you do not recognize,
and the rich he has sent away empty. the one who is coming after me,
He has come to the help of his servant Israel whose sandal strap I am not worthy to untie.”
for he has remembered his promise of mercy,—R. This happened in Bethany across the Jordan,
where John was baptizing.
SECOND READING (1 Thes 5:16-24)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Rejoice always. Pray without ceasing.
In all circumstances give thanks,
for this is the will of God for you in Christ Jesus.
Do not quench the Spirit.
Do not despise prophetic utterances.
Test everything; retain what is good.
Refrain from every kind of evil.
May the God of peace make you perfectly holy
and may you entirely, spirit, soul, and body,
be preserved blameless for the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.
The one who calls you is faithful,
and he will also accomplish it.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 23 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Isaiah 61:1, cited in Luke 4:18)
THIRD SUNDAY OF ADVENT—C
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Zep 3:14-18a) The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
because he has anointed me
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Zephaniah: to bring glad tidings to the poor.—R.
SHOUT for joy, O daughter Zion! GOSPEL (Lk 3:10-18)
Sing joyfully, O Israel!
Be glad and exult with all your heart, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
O daughter Jerusalem!
The LORD has removed the judgment against you THE crowds asked John the Baptist,
he has turned away your enemies; “What should we do?”
the King of Israel, the LORD, is in your midst, He said to them in reply,
you have no further misfortune to fear. “Whoever has two cloaks
On that day, it shall be said to Jerusalem: should share with the person who has none.
Fear not, O Zion, be not discouraged! And whoever has food should do likewise.”
The LORD, your God, is in your midst, Even tax collectors came to be baptized and they said to him,
a mighty savior; “Teacher, what should we do?”
he will rejoice over you with gladness, He answered them,
and renew you in his love, “Stop collecting more than what is prescribed.”
he will sing joyfully because of you, Soldiers also asked him,
as one sings at festivals. “And what is it that we should do?”
He told them,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. “Do not practice extortion,
do not falsely accuse anyone,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Isaiah 12:2-3, 4, 5-6) and be satisfied with your wages.”
R. (6) Cry out with joy and gladness: Now the people were filled with expectation,
for among you is the great and Holy One of Israel. and all were asking in their hearts
whether John might be the Christ.
God indeed is my savior; John answered them all, saying,
I am confident and unafraid. “I am baptizing you with water,
My strength and my courage is the LORD, but one mightier than I is coming.
and he has been my savior. I am not worthy to loosen the thongs of his sandals.
With joy you will draw water He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.
at the fountain of salvation.—R. His winnowing fan is in his hand to clear his threshing floor
and to gather the wheat into his barn,
Give thanks to the LORD, acclaim his name; but the chaff he will burn with unquenchable fire.”
among the nations make known his deeds, Exhorting them in many other ways,
proclaim how exalted is his name.—R. he preached good news to the people.
Sing praise to the LORD for his glorious achievement; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
let this be known throughout all the earth.
Shout with exultation, O city of Zion,
for great in your midst
is the Holy One of Israel!—R.
SECOND READING (Phil 4:4-7)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Rejoice in the Lord always.
I shall say it again: rejoice!
Your kindness should be known to all.
The Lord is near.
Have no anxiety at all, but in everything,
by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving,
make your requests known to God.
Then the peace of God that surpasses all understanding
will guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 24 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Matthew 1:23)
FOURTH SUNDAY OF ADVENT—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Is 7:10-14) The virgin shall conceive, and bear a son,
they shall name him Emmanuel.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
GOSPEL (Mt 1:18-24)
THE LORD spoke to Ahaz, saying:
Ask for a sign from the LORD, your God; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
let it be deep as the netherworld, or high as the sky!
But Ahaz answered, THIS is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about.
“I will not ask! I will not tempt the LORD!” When his mother Mary was betrothed to Joseph,
Then Isaiah said: but before they lived together,
Listen, O house of David! she was found with child through the Holy Spirit.
Is it not enough for you to weary people, Joseph her husband, since he was a righteous man,
must you also weary my God? yet unwilling to expose her to shame,
Therefore the Lord himself will give you this sign: decided to divorce her quietly.
the virgin shall conceive, and bear a son, Such was his intention when, behold,
and shall name him Emmanuel. the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said,
“Joseph, son of David,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. do not be afraid to take Mary your wife into your home.
For it is through the Holy Spirit
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 24:1-2, 3-4, 5-6) that this child has been conceived in her.
She will bear a son and you are to name him Jesus,
R. (7c and 10b) Let the Lord enter; he is king of glory. because he will save his people from their sins.”
All this took place to fulfill what the Lord had said through the prophet:
The LORD’S are the earth and its fullness; Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
the world and those who dwell in it. and they shall name him Emmanuel,
For he founded it upon the seas which means “God is with us.”
and established it upon the rivers.—R. When Joseph awoke,
he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him
Who can ascend the mountain of the LORD? and took his wife into his home.
or who may stand in his holy place?
One whose hands are sinless, whose heart is clean, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
who desires not what is vain.—R.
He shall receive a blessing from the LORD,
a reward from God his savior.
Such is the race that seeks for him,
that seeks the face of the God of Jacob.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 1:1-7)
The beginning of the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
PAUL, a slave of Christ Jesus,
called to be an apostle and set apart for the gospel of God,
which he promised previously through his prophets in the
holy Scriptures,
the gospel about his Son, descended from David according to the flesh,
but established as Son of God in power
according to the Spirit of holiness
through resurrection from the dead, Jesus Christ our Lord.
Through him we have received the grace of apostleship,
to bring about the obedience of faith,
for the sake of his name, among all the Gentiles,
among whom are you also, who are called to belong to Jesus Christ;
to all the beloved of God in Rome, called to be holy.
Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 25 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS BROTHERS and sisters:
FOURTH SUNDAY OF ADVENT—B To Him who can strengthen you,
according to my gospel and the proclamation of Jesus Christ,
according to the revelation of the mystery kept secret for long ages
FIRST READING (2 Sam 7:1-5, 8b-12, 14a, 16) but now manifested through the prophetic writings and,
according to the command of the eternal God,
A reading from the second Book of Samuel: made known to all nations to bring about the obedience of faith,
to the only wise God, through Jesus Christ
WHEN King David was settled in his palace, be glory forever and ever. Amen.
and the LORD had given him rest from his enemies on every side,
he said to Nathan the prophet, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
“Here I am living in a house of cedar,
while the ark of God dwells in a tent!” ALLELUIA (Luke 1:38)
Nathan answered the king,
“Go, do whatever you have in mind, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
for the LORD is with you.”
But that night the LORD spoke to Nathan and said: Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord.
“Go, tell my servant David, ‘Thus says the LORD: May it be done to me according to your word.—R.
Should you build me a house to dwell in?’
GOSPEL (Lk 1:26-38)
“It was I who took you from the pasture
and from the care of the flock + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
to be commander of my people Israel.
I have been with you wherever you went, THE angel Gabriel was sent from God
and I have destroyed all your enemies before you. to a town of Galilee called Nazareth,
And I will make you famous like the great ones of the earth. to a virgin betrothed to a man named Joseph,
I will fix a place for my people Israel; of the house of David,
I will plant them so that they may dwell in their place and the virgin’s name was Mary.
without further disturbance. And coming to her, he said,
Neither shall the wicked continue to afflict them as they did of old, “Hail, full of grace! The Lord is with you.”
since the time I first appointed judges over my people Israel. But she was greatly troubled at what was said
I will give you rest from all your enemies. and pondered what sort of greeting this might be.
The LORD also reveals to you Then the angel said to her,
that he will establish a house for you. “Do not be afraid, Mary,
And when your time comes and you rest with your ancestors, for you have found favor with God.
I will raise up your heir after you, sprung from your loins,
and I will make his kingdom firm. “Behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son,
I will be a father to him, and you shall name him Jesus.
and he shall be a son to me. He will be great and will be called Son of the Most High,
Your house and your kingdom shall endure forever before me; and the Lord God will give him the throne of David his father,
your throne shall stand firm forever.” and he will rule over the house of Jacob forever,
and of his kingdom there will be no end.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. But Mary said to the angel,
“How can this be,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 89:2-3, 4-5, 27, 29) since I have no relations with a man?”
And the angel said to her in reply,
R. (2a) For ever I will sing the goodness of the Lord. “The Holy Spirit will come upon you,
and the power of the Most High will overshadow you.
The promises of the LORD I will sing forever; Therefore the child to be born
through all generations my mouth shall proclaim your faithfulness. will be called holy, the Son of God.
For you have said, “My kindness is established forever”; And behold, Elizabeth, your relative,
in heaven you have confirmed your faithfulness.—R. has also conceived a son in her old age,
and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren;
“I have made a covenant with my chosen one, for nothing will be impossible for God.”
I have sworn to David my servant: Mary said, “Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord.
Forever will I confirm your posterity May it be done to me according to your word.”
and establish your throne for all generations.”—R. Then the angel departed from her.
“He shall say of me, ‘You are my father, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
my God, the Rock, my savior.’
Forever I will maintain my kindness toward him,
and my covenant with him stands firm.”—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 16:25-27)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 26 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS By this “will, ”we have been consecrated
FOURTH SUNDAY OF ADVENT—C through the offering of the body of Jesus Christ once for all.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Mi 5:1-4a)
ALLELUIA (Luke 1:38)
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Micah:
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
THUS says the LORD:
You, Bethlehem-Ephrathah Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord.
too small to be among the clans of Judah, May it be done to me according to your word.—R.
from you shall come forth for me
one who is to be ruler in Israel; GOSPEL (Lk 1:39-45)
whose origin is from of old,
from ancient times. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
Therefore the Lord will give them up, until the time
when she who is to give birth has borne, MARY set out
and the rest of his kindred shall return and traveled to the hill country in haste
to the children of Israel. to a town of Judah,
He shall stand firm and shepherd his flock where she entered the house of Zechariah
by the strength of the LORD, and greeted Elizabeth.
in the majestic name of the LORD, his God; When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting,
and they shall remain, for now his greatness the infant leaped in her womb,
shall reach to the ends of the earth; and Elizabeth, filled with the Holy Spirit,
he shall be peace. cried out in a loud voice and said,
“Blessed are you among women,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and blessed is the fruit of your womb.
And how does this happen to me,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 80:2-3, 15-16, 18-19) that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For at the moment the sound of your greeting reached my ears,
R. (4) Lord, make us turn to you; the infant in my womb leaped for joy.
let us see your face and we shall be saved. Blessed are you who believed
that what was spoken to you by the Lord
O shepherd of Israel, hearken, would be fulfilled.”
from your throne upon the cherubim, shine forth.
Rouse your power, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and come to save us.—R.
Once again, O Lord of hosts,
look down from heaven, and see;
take care of this vine,
and protect what your right hand has planted
the son of man whom you yourself made strong.—R.
May your help be with the man of your right hand,
with the son of man whom you yourself made strong.
Then we will no more withdraw from you;
give us new life, and we will call upon your name.—R.
SECOND READING (Heb 10:5-10)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
BROTHERS and sisters:
When Christ came into the world, he said:
“Sacrifice and offering you did not desire,
but a body you prepared for me;
in holocausts and sin offerings you took no delight.
Then I said, ‘As is written of me in the scroll,
behold, I come to do your will, O God.’”
First he says, “Sacrifices and offerings,
holocausts and sin offerings,
you neither desired nor delighted in.”
These are offered according to the law.
Then he says, “Behold, I come to do your will.”
He takes away the first to establish the second.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 27 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
CHRISTMAS (VIGIL MASS)—ABC THE book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ,
the son of David, the son of Abraham.
FIRST READING (Is 62:1-5) Abraham became the father of Isaac,
Isaac the father of Jacob,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers.
Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah,
FOR Zion’s sake I will not be silent, whose mother was Tamar.
for Jerusalem’s sake I will not be quiet, Perez became the father of Hezron,
until her vindication shines forth like the dawn Hezron the father of Ram,
and her victory like a burning torch. Ram the father of Amminadab.
Amminadab became the father of Nahshon,
Nations shall behold your vindication, Nahshon the father of Salmon,
and all the kings your glory; Salmon the father of Boaz,
you shall be called by a new name whose mother was Rahab.
pronounced by the mouth of the LORD. Boaz became the father of Obed,
You shall be a glorious crown in the hand of the LORD, whose mother was Ruth.
a royal diadem held by your God. Obed became the father of Jesse,
No more shall people call you “Forsaken,” Jesse the father of David the king.
or your land “Desolate,”
but you shall be called “My Delight,” David became the father of Solomon,
and your land “Espoused.” whose mother had been the wife of Uriah.
For the LORD delights in you Solomon became the father of Rehoboam,
and makes your land his spouse. Rehoboam the father of Abijah,
As a young man marries a virgin, Abijah the father of Asaph.
your Builder shall marry you; Asaph became the father of Jehoshaphat,
and as a bridegroom rejoices in his bride Jehoshaphat the father of Joram,
so shall your God rejoice in you. Joram the father of Uzziah.
Uzziah became the father of Jotham,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Jotham the father of Ahaz,
Ahaz the father of Hezekiah.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 89:4-5, 16-17, 27, 29) Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh,
Manasseh the father of Amos,
R. (2a) For ever I will sing the goodness of the Lord. Amos the father of Josiah.
Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers
I have made a covenant with my chosen one, at the time of the Babylonian exile.
I have sworn to David my servant:
Forever will I confirm your posterity After the Babylonian exile,
and establish your throne for all generations.—R. Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel,
Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel,
Blessed the people who know the joyful shout; Zerubbabel the father of Abiud.
in the light of your countenance, O LORD, they walk. Abiud became the father of Eliakim,
At your name they rejoice all the day, Eliakim the father of Azor,
and through your justice they are exalted.—R. Azor the father of Zadok.
Zadok became the father of Achim,
He shall say of me, “You are my father, Achim the father of Eliud,
my God, the rock, my savior.” Eliud the father of Eleazar.
Forever I will maintain my kindness toward him, Eleazar became the father of Matthan,
and my covenant with him stands firm.—R. Matthan the father of Jacob,
Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary.
SECOND READING (Acts 13:16-17, 22-25) Of her was born Jesus who is called the Christ.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: Thus the total number of generations
from Abraham to David
WHEN Paul reached Antioch in Pisidia and entered the synagogue, is fourteen generations;
he stood up, motioned with his hand, and said, from David to the Babylonian exile,
“Fellow Israelites and you others who are God-fearing, listen. fourteen generations;
The God of this people Israel chose our ancestors from the Babylonian exile to the Christ,
and exalted the people during their sojourn in the fourteen generations.
land of Egypt.
With uplifted arm he led them out of it. [ Now this is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about.
Then he removed Saul and raised up David as king; When his mother Mary was betrothed to Joseph,
of him he testified, but before they lived together,
‘I have found David, son of Jesse, a man after my own heart; she was found with child through the Holy Spirit.
he will carry out my every wish.’ Joseph her husband, since he was a righteous man,
From this man’s descendants God, according to his promise, yet unwilling to expose her to shame,
has brought to Israel a savior, Jesus. decided to divorce her quietly.
John heralded his coming by proclaiming a baptism of repentance Such was his intention when, behold,
to all the people of Israel; the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said,
and as John was completing his course, he would say, “Joseph, son of David,
‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not he. do not be afraid to take Mary your wife into your home.
Behold, one is coming after me; For it is through the Holy Spirit
I am not worthy to unfasten the sandals of his feet.’” that this child has been conceived in her.
She will bear a son and you are to name him Jesus,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. because he will save his people from their sins.”
All this took place to fulfill
ALLELUIA what the Lord had said through the prophet:
Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
R. Alleluia, alleluia. and they shall name him Emmanuel,
which means “God is with us.”
Tomorrow the wickedness of the earth will be destroyed: When Joseph awoke,
the Savior of the world will reign over us.—R. he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him
and took his wife into his home.
GOSPEL (Mt 1:1-25 or Mt 1:18-25) He had no relations with her until she bore a son,
and he named him Jesus. ]
+ The beginning of the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 28 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ‘I have found David, son of Jesse, a man after my own heart;
CHRISTMAS (VIGIL MASS)—ABC he will carry out my every wish.’
From this man’s descendants God, according to his promise,
has brought to Israel a savior, Jesus.
FIRST READING (Is 62:1-5) John heralded his coming by proclaiming a baptism of repentance
to all the people of Israel;
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: and as John was completing his course, he would say,
‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not he.
FOR Zion’s sake I will not be silent, Behold, one is coming after me;
for Jerusalem’s sake I will not be quiet, I am not worthy to unfasten the sandals of his feet.’”
until her vindication shines forth like the dawn
and her victory like a burning torch. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Nations shall behold your vindication, ALLELUIA
and all the kings your glory;
you shall be called by a new name R. Alleluia, alleluia.
pronounced by the mouth of the LORD.
You shall be a glorious crown in the hand of the LORD, Tomorrow the wickedness of the earth will be destroyed:
a royal diadem held by your God. the Savior of the world will reign over us.—R.
No more shall people call you “Forsaken,”
or your land “Desolate,” GOSPEL (Mt 1:1-25 or Mt 1:18-25)
but you shall be called “My Delight,”
and your land “Espoused.” + The beginning of the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
For the LORD delights in you
and makes your land his spouse. [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
As a young man marries a virgin,
your Builder shall marry you; THE book of the genealogy of Jesus Christ,
and as a bridegroom rejoices in his bride the son of David, the son of Abraham.
so shall your God rejoice in you.
Abraham became the father of Isaac,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Isaac the father of Jacob,
Jacob the father of Judah and his brothers.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 89:4-5, 16-17, 27, 29) Judah became the father of Perez and Zerah,
whose mother was Tamar.
R. (2a) For ever I will sing the goodness of the Lord. Perez became the father of Hezron,
Hezron the father of Ram,
I have made a covenant with my chosen one, Ram the father of Amminadab.
I have sworn to David my servant: Amminadab became the father of Nahshon,
Forever will I confirm your posterity Nahshon the father of Salmon,
and establish your throne for all generations.—R. Salmon the father of Boaz,
whose mother was Rahab.
Blessed the people who know the joyful shout; Boaz became the father of Obed,
in the light of your countenance, O LORD, they walk. whose mother was Ruth.
At your name they rejoice all the day, Obed became the father of Jesse,
and through your justice they are exalted.—R. Jesse the father of David the king.
He shall say of me, “You are my father, David became the father of Solomon,
my God, the rock, my savior.” whose mother had been the wife of Uriah.
Forever I will maintain my kindness toward him, Solomon became the father of Rehoboam,
and my covenant with him stands firm.—R. Rehoboam the father of Abijah,
Abijah the father of Asaph.
SECOND READING (Acts 13:16-17, 22-25) Asaph became the father of Jehoshaphat,
Jehoshaphat the father of Joram,
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: Joram the father of Uzziah.
Uzziah became the father of Jotham,
WHEN Paul reached Antioch in Pisidia and entered the synagogue, Jotham the father of Ahaz,
he stood up, motioned with his hand, and said, Ahaz the father of Hezekiah.
“Fellow Israelites and you others who are God-fearing, listen. Hezekiah became the father of Manasseh,
The God of this people Israel chose our ancestors Manasseh the father of Amos,
and exalted the people during their sojourn in the Amos the father of Josiah.
land of Egypt. Josiah became the father of Jechoniah and his brothers
With uplifted arm he led them out of it. at the time of the Babylonian exile.
Then he removed Saul and raised up David as king;
of him he testified, After the Babylonian exile,
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 29 ---
Jechoniah became the father of Shealtiel,
Shealtiel the father of Zerubbabel,
Zerubbabel the father of Abiud.
Abiud became the father of Eliakim,
Eliakim the father of Azor,
Azor the father of Zadok.
Zadok became the father of Achim,
Achim the father of Eliud,
Eliud the father of Eleazar.
Eleazar became the father of Matthan,
Matthan the father of Jacob,
Jacob the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary.
Of her was born Jesus who is called the Christ.
Thus the total number of generations
from Abraham to David
is fourteen generations;
from David to the Babylonian exile,
fourteen generations;
from the Babylonian exile to the Christ,
fourteen generations.
[ Now this is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about.
When his mother Mary was betrothed to Joseph,
but before they lived together,
she was found with child through the Holy Spirit.
Joseph her husband, since he was a righteous man,
yet unwilling to expose her to shame,
decided to divorce her quietly.
Such was his intention when, behold,
the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said,
“Joseph, son of David,
do not be afraid to take Mary your wife into your home.
For it is through the Holy Spirit
that this child has been conceived in her.
She will bear a son and you are to name him Jesus,
because he will save his people from their sins.”
All this took place to fulfill
what the Lord had said through the prophet:
Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
and they shall name him Emmanuel,
which means “God is with us.”
When Joseph awoke,
he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him
and took his wife into his home.
He had no relations with her until she bore a son,
and he named him Jesus. ]
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 30 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ‘I have found David, son of Jesse, a man after my own heart;
CHRISTMAS (VIGIL MASS)—ABC he will carry out my every wish.’
From this man’s descendants God, according to his promise,
Only shorter form of Gospel is given below. has brought to Israel a savior, Jesus.
John heralded his coming by proclaiming a baptism of repentance
to all the people of Israel;
FIRST READING (Is 62:1-5) and as John was completing his course, he would say,
‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not he.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: Behold, one is coming after me;
I am not worthy to unfasten the sandals of his feet.’”
FOR Zion’s sake I will not be silent,
for Jerusalem’s sake I will not be quiet, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
until her vindication shines forth like the dawn
and her victory like a burning torch. ALLELUIA
Nations shall behold your vindication, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and all the kings your glory;
you shall be called by a new name Tomorrow the wickedness of the earth will be destroyed:
pronounced by the mouth of the LORD. the Savior of the world will reign over us.—R.
You shall be a glorious crown in the hand of the LORD,
a royal diadem held by your God. GOSPEL (Shorter form: Mt 1:18-25)
No more shall people call you “Forsaken,”
or your land “Desolate,” + The beginning of the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
but you shall be called “My Delight,”
and your land “Espoused.” NOW this is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about.
For the LORD delights in you When his mother Mary was betrothed to Joseph,
and makes your land his spouse. but before they lived together,
As a young man marries a virgin, she was found with child through the Holy Spirit.
your Builder shall marry you; Joseph her husband, since he was a righteous man,
and as a bridegroom rejoices in his bride yet unwilling to expose her to shame,
so shall your God rejoice in you. decided to divorce her quietly.
Such was his intention when, behold,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said,
“Joseph, son of David,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 89:4-5, 16-17, 27, 29) do not be afraid to take Mary your wife into your home.
For it is through the Holy Spirit
R. (2a) For ever I will sing the goodness of the Lord. that this child has been conceived in her.
She will bear a son and you are to name him Jesus,
I have made a covenant with my chosen one, because he will save his people from their sins.”
I have sworn to David my servant: All this took place to fulfill
Forever will I confirm your posterity what the Lord had said through the prophet:
and establish your throne for all generations.—R. Behold, the virgin shall conceive and bear a son,
and they shall name him Emmanuel,
Blessed the people who know the joyful shout; which means “God is with us.”
in the light of your countenance, O LORD, they walk. When Joseph awoke,
At your name they rejoice all the day, he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him
and through your justice they are exalted.—R. and took his wife into his home.
He had no relations with her until she bore a son,
He shall say of me, “You are my father, and he named him Jesus.
my God, the rock, my savior.”
Forever I will maintain my kindness toward him, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and my covenant with him stands firm.—R.
SECOND READING (Acts 13:16-17, 22-25)
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
WHEN Paul reached Antioch in Pisidia and entered the synagogue,
he stood up, motioned with his hand, and said,
“Fellow Israelites and you others who are God-fearing, listen.
The God of this people Israel chose our ancestors
and exalted the people during their sojourn in the
land of Egypt.
With uplifted arm he led them out of it.
Then he removed Saul and raised up David as king;
of him he testified,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 31 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and to live temperately, justly, and devoutly in this age,
CHRISTMAS (MASS AT MIDNIGHT)—ABC as we await the blessed hope,
the appearance of the glory of our great God
and savior Jesus Christ,
FIRST READING (Is 9:1-6) who gave himself for us to deliver us from all lawlessness
and to cleanse for himself a people as his own,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: eager to do what is good.
THE people who walked in darkness The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
have seen a great light;
upon those who dwelt in the land of gloom ALLELUIA (Luke 2:10-11)
a light has shone.
You have brought them abundant joy R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and great rejoicing,
as they rejoice before you as at the harvest, I proclaim to you good news of great joy:
as people make merry when dividing spoils. today a Savior is born for us,
For the yoke that burdened them, Christ the Lord.—R.
the pole on their shoulder,
and the rod of their taskmaster GOSPEL (Lk 2:1-14)
you have smashed, as on the day of Midian.
For every boot that tramped in battle, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
every cloak rolled in blood,
will be burned as fuel for flames. IN those days a decree went out from Caesar Augustus
For a child is born to us, a son is given us; that the whole world should be enrolled.
upon his shoulder dominion rests. This was the first enrollment,
They name him Wonder-Counselor, God-Hero, when Quirinius was governor of Syria.
Father-Forever, Prince of Peace. So all went to be enrolled, each to his own town.
His dominion is vast And Joseph too went up from Galilee from the town of Nazareth
and forever peaceful, to Judea, to the city of David that is called Bethlehem,
from David’s throne, and over his kingdom, because he was of the house and family of David,
which he confirms and sustains to be enrolled with Mary, his betrothed, who was with child.
by judgment and justice, While they were there,
both now and forever. the time came for her to have her child,
The zeal of the LORD of hosts will do this! and she gave birth to her firstborn son.
She wrapped him in swaddling clothes and laid him in a manger,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. because there was no room for them in the inn.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 96:1-2, 2-3, 11-12, 13) Now there were shepherds in that region living in the fields
and keeping the night watch over their flock.
R. (Luke 2:11) Today is born our Savior, Christ the Lord. The angel of the Lord appeared to them
and the glory of the Lord shone around them,
Sing to the LORD a new song; and they were struck with great fear.
sing to the LORD, all you lands. The angel said to them,
Sing to the LORD; bless his name.—R. “Do not be afraid;
for behold, I proclaim to you good news of great joy
Announce his salvation, day after day. that will be for all the people.
Tell his glory among the nations; For today in the city of David
among all peoples, his wondrous deeds.—R. a savior has been born for you who is Christ and Lord.
And this will be a sign for you:
Let the heavens be glad and the earth rejoice; you will find an infant wrapped in swaddling clothes
let the sea and what fills it resound; and lying in a manger.”
let the plains be joyful and all that is in them! And suddenly there was a multitude of the heavenly host with the angel,
Then shall all the trees of the forest exult.—R. praising God and saying:
“Glory to God in the highest
They shall exult before the LORD, for he comes; and on earth peace to those on whom his favor rests.”
for he comes to rule the earth.
He shall rule the world with justice The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and the peoples with his constancy.—R.
SECOND READING (Ti 2:11-14)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to Titus:
BELOVED:
The grace of God has appeared, saving all
and training us to reject godless ways and worldly desires
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 32 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS the shepherds said to one another,
CHRISTMAS (MASS AT DAWN)—ABC “Let us go, then, to Bethlehem
to see this thing that has taken place,
which the Lord has made known to us.”
FIRST READING (Is 62:11-12) So they went in haste and found Mary and Joseph,
and the infant lying in the manger.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: When they saw this,
they made known the message
SEE, the LORD proclaims that had been told them about this child.
to the ends of the earth: All who heard it were amazed
say to daughter Zion, by what had been told them by the shepherds.
your savior comes! And Mary kept all these things,
Here is his reward with him, reflecting on them in her heart.
his recompense before him. Then the shepherds returned,
They shall be called the holy people, glorifying and praising God
the redeemed of the LORD, for all they had heard and seen,
and you shall be called “Frequented,” just as it had been told to them.
a city that is not forsaken.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 97:1, 6, 11-12)
R. A light will shine on us this day: the Lord is born for us.
The LORD is king; let the earth rejoice;
let the many islands be glad.
The heavens proclaim his justice,
and all peoples see his glory.—R.
Light dawns for the just;
and gladness, for the upright of heart.
Be glad in the LORD, you just,
and give thanks to his holy name.—R.
SECOND READING (Ti 3:4-7)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to Titus:
BELOVED:
When the kindness and generous love
of God our savior appeared,
not because of any righteous deeds we had done
but because of his mercy,
He saved us through the bath of rebirth
and renewal by the Holy Spirit,
whom he richly poured out on us
through Jesus Christ our savior,
so that we might be justified by his grace
and become heirs in hope of eternal life.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Luke 2:14)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Glory to God in the highest,
and on earth peace to those
on whom his favor rests.—R.
GOSPEL (Lk 2:15-20)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
WHEN the angels went away from them to heaven,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 33 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS For to which of the angels did God ever say:
CHRISTMAS (MASS DURING THE DAY)—ABC “You are my son; this day I have begotten you”?
Or again:
“I will be a father to him, and he shall be a son to me”?
And again, when he leads the firstborn into the world, he says:
FIRST READING (Is 52:7-10)
“Let all the angels of God worship him.”
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
HOW beautiful upon the mountains
ALLELUIA
are the feet of him who brings glad tidings,
announcing peace, bearing good news,
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
announcing salvation, and saying to Zion,
“Your God is King!”
A holy day has dawned upon us.
Come, you nations, and adore the Lord.
Hark! Your sentinels raise a cry,
For today a great light has come upon the earth.—R.
together they shout for joy,
for they see directly, before their eyes,
GOSPEL (Jn 1:1-18 or 1:1-5, 9-14)
the LORD restoring Zion.
Break out together in song,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
O ruins of Jerusalem!
For the LORD comforts his people,
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
he redeems Jerusalem.
The LORD has bared his holy arm
[ IN the beginning was the Word,
in the sight of all the nations;
and the Word was with God,
all the ends of the earth will behold
and the Word was God.
the salvation of our God.
He was in the beginning with God.
All things came to be through him,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and without him nothing came to be.
What came to be through him was life,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 98:1, 2-3, 3-4, 5-6)
and this life was the light of the human race;
the light shines in the darkness,
R. (3c) All the ends of the earth have seen the saving power of God.
and the darkness has not overcome it. ]
A man named John was sent from God.
Sing to the LORD a new song,
He came for testimony, to testify to the light,
for he has done wondrous deeds;
so that all might believe through him.
his right hand has won victory for him,
He was not the light,
his holy arm.—R.
but came to testify to the light.
[ The true light, which enlightens everyone, was coming into the world.
The LORD has made his salvation known:
He was in the world,
in the sight of the nations he has revealed his justice.
and the world came to be through him,
He has remembered his kindness and his faithfulness
but the world did not know him.
toward the house of Israel.—R.
He came to what was his own,
but his own people did not accept him.
All the ends of the earth have seen
the salvation by our God.
But to those who did accept him
Sing joyfully to the LORD, all you lands;
he gave power to become children of God,
break into song; sing praise.—R.
to those who believe in his name,
who were born not by natural generation
Sing praise to the LORD with the harp,
nor by human choice nor by a man’s decision
with the harp and melodious song.
but of God.
With trumpets and the sound of the horn
And the Word became flesh
sing joyfully before the King, the LORD.—R.
and made his dwelling among us,
and we saw his glory,
SECOND READING (Heb 1:1-6)
the glory as of the Father’s only Son,
full of grace and truth. ]
A reading from the beginning of the Letter to the Hebrews:
John testified to him and cried out, saying,
“This was he of whom I said,
BROTHERS and sisters:
‘The one who is coming after me ranks ahead of me
In times past, God spoke in partial and various ways
because he existed before me.’”
to our ancestors through the prophets;
From his fullness we have all received,
in these last days, he has spoken to us through the Son,
grace in place of grace,
whom he made heir of all things
because while the law was given through Moses,
and through whom he created the universe,
grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
who is the refulgence of his glory,
No one has ever seen God.
the very imprint of his being,
The only Son, God, who is at the Father’s side,
and who sustains all things by his mighty word.
has revealed him.
When he had accomplished purification from sins,
he took his seat at the right hand of the Majesty on high,
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
as far superior to the angels
as the name he has inherited is more excellent than theirs.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 34 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly,
HOLY FAMILY—ABC (Gospel A) as in all wisdom you teach and admonish one another,
singing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs
with gratitude in your hearts to God.
FIRST READING (Sir 3:2-7, 12-14) And whatever you do, in word or in deed,
do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus,
A reading from the Book of Sirach: giving thanks to God the Father through him. ]
GOD sets a father in honor over his children; Wives, be subordinate to your husbands,
a mother’s authority he confirms over her sons. as is proper in the Lord.
Whoever honors his father atones for sins, Husbands, love your wives,
and preserves himself from them. and avoid any bitterness toward them.
When he prays, he is heard; Children, obey your parents in everything,
he stores up riches who reveres his mother. for this is pleasing to the Lord.
Whoever honors his father is gladdened by children, Fathers, do not provoke your children,
and, when he prays, is heard. so they may not become discouraged.
Whoever reveres his father will live a long life;
he who obeys his father brings comfort to his mother. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
My son, take care of your father when he is old; ALLELUIA (Colossians 3:15a, 16a)
grieve him not as long as he lives.
Even if his mind fail, be considerate of him; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
revile him not all the days of his life;
kindness to a father will not be forgotten, Let the peace of Christ control your hearts;
firmly planted against the debt of your sins let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.—R.
—a house raised in justice to you.
GOSPEL—A (Mt 2:13-15, 19-23)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 128:1-2, 3, 4-5)
WHEN the magi had departed, behold,
R. (cf. 1) Blessed are those who fear the Lord and walk in his ways. the angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream and said,
“Rise, take the child and his mother, flee to Egypt,
Blessed is everyone who fears the LORD, and stay there until I tell you.
who walks in his ways! Herod is going to search for the child to destroy him.”
For you shall eat the fruit of your handiwork; Joseph rose and took the child and his mother by night
blessed shall you be, and favored.—R. and departed for Egypt.
He stayed there until the death of Herod,
Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine that what the Lord had said through the prophet might be fulfilled,
in the recesses of your home; Out of Egypt I called my son.
your children like olive plants
around your table.—R. When Herod had died, behold,
the angel of the Lord appeared in a dream
Behold, thus is the man blessed to Joseph in Egypt and said,
who fears the LORD. “Rise, take the child and his mother and go to the land of Israel,
The LORD bless you from Zion: for those who sought the child’s life are dead.”
may you see the prosperity of Jerusalem He rose, took the child and his mother,
all the days of your life.—R. and went to the land of Israel.
But when he heard that Archelaus was ruling over Judea
SECOND READING (Col 3:12-21 or 3:12-17) in place of his father Herod,
he was afraid to go back there.
[ Shorter form in brackets. ] And because he had been warned in a dream,
he departed for the region of Galilee.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Colossians: He went and dwelt in a town called Nazareth,
so that what had been spoken through the prophets
[ BROTHERS and sisters: might be fulfilled,
Put on, as God’s chosen ones, holy and beloved, He shall be called a Nazorean.
heartfelt compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience,
bearing with one another and forgiving one another, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
if one has a grievance against another;
as the Lord has forgiven you, so must you also do.
And over all these put on love,
that is, the bond of perfection.
And let the peace of Christ control your hearts,
the peace into which you were also called in one body.
And be thankful.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 35 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Husbands, love your wives,
and avoid any bitterness toward them.
HOLY FAMILY—ABC (Gospel B)
Children, obey your parents in everything,
for this is pleasing to the Lord.
Fathers, do not provoke your children,
FIRST READING (Sir 3:2-7, 12-14)
so they may not become discouraged.
A reading from the Book of Sirach:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
GOD sets a father in honor over his children;
ALLELUIA (Colossians 3:15a, 16a)
a mother’s authority he confirms over her sons.
Whoever honors his father atones for sins,
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and preserves himself from them.
When he prays, he is heard;
Let the peace of Christ control your hearts;
he stores up riches who reveres his mother.
let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.—R.
Whoever honors his father is gladdened by children,
and, when he prays, is heard.
GOSPEL—B (Lk 2:22-40 or 2:22, 39-40)
Whoever reveres his father will live a long life;
he who obeys his father brings comfort to his mother.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
My son, take care of your father when he is old;
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
grieve him not as long as he lives.
Even if his mind fail, be considerate of him;
[ WHEN the days were completed for their purification
revile him not all the days of his life;
according to the law of Moses,
kindness to a father will not be forgotten,
They took him up to Jerusalem
firmly planted against the debt of your sins
to present him to the Lord, ]
—a house raised in justice to you.
just as it is written in the law of the Lord,
Every male that opens the womb shall be consecrated to the Lord,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and to offer the sacrifice of
a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 128:1-2, 3, 4-5)
in accordance with the dictate in the law of the Lord.
R. (cf. 1) Blessed are those who fear the Lord and walk in his ways.
Now there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon.
This man was righteous and devout,
Blessed is everyone who fears the LORD,
awaiting the consolation of Israel,
who walks in his ways!
and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
For you shall eat the fruit of your handiwork;
It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit
blessed shall you be, and favored.—R.
that he should not see death
before he had seen the Christ of the Lord.
Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine
He came in the Spirit into the temple;
in the recesses of your home;
and when the parents brought in the child Jesus
your children like olive plants
to perform the custom of the law in regard to him,
around your table.—R.
He took him into his arms and blessed God, saying:
“Now, Master, you may let your servant go
Behold, thus is the man blessed
in peace, according to your word,
who fears the LORD.
for my eyes have seen your salvation,
The LORD bless you from Zion:
which you prepared in sight of all the peoples,
may you see the prosperity of Jerusalem
a light for revelation to the Gentiles,
all the days of your life.—R.
and glory for your people Israel.”
The child’s father and mother were amazed at what was said about him;
SECOND READING (Col 3:12-21 or 3:12-17)
and Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother,
“Behold, this child is destined
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
for the fall and rise of many in Israel,
and to be a sign that will be contradicted
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Colossians:
—and you yourself a sword will pierce—
so that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.”
[ BROTHERS and sisters:
There was also a prophetess, Anna,
Put on, as God’s chosen ones, holy and beloved,
the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher.
heartfelt compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience,
She was advanced in years,
bearing with one another and forgiving one another,
having lived seven years with her husband after her marriage,
if one has a grievance against another;
and then as a widow until she was eighty-four.
as the Lord has forgiven you, so must you also do.
She never left the temple,
And over all these put on love,
but worshiped night and day with fasting and prayer.
that is, the bond of perfection.
And coming forward at that very time,
And let the peace of Christ control your hearts,
she gave thanks to God and spoke about the child
the peace into which you were also called in one body.
to all who were awaiting the redemption of Jerusalem.
And be thankful.
Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly,
[ When they had fulfilled all the prescriptions
as in all wisdom you teach and admonish one another,
of the law of the Lord,
singing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs
they returned to Galilee,
with gratitude in your hearts to God.
to their own town of Nazareth.
And whatever you do, in word or in deed,
The child grew and became strong, filled with wisdom;
do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus,
and the favor of God was upon him. ]
giving thanks to God the Father through him. ]
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Wives, be subordinate to your husbands,
as is proper in the Lord.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 36 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Let the word of Christ dwell in you richly,
HOLY FAMILY—ABC (Gospel C) as in all wisdom you teach and admonish one another,
singing psalms, hymns, and spiritual songs
with gratitude in your hearts to God.
FIRST READING (Sir 3:2-7, 12-14) And whatever you do, in word or in deed,
do everything in the name of the Lord Jesus,
A reading from the Book of Sirach: giving thanks to God the Father through him. ]
GOD sets a father in honor over his children; Wives, be subordinate to your husbands,
a mother’s authority he confirms over her sons. as is proper in the Lord.
Whoever honors his father atones for sins, Husbands, love your wives,
and preserves himself from them. and avoid any bitterness toward them.
When he prays, he is heard; Children, obey your parents in everything,
he stores up riches who reveres his mother. for this is pleasing to the Lord.
Whoever honors his father is gladdened by children, Fathers, do not provoke your children,
and, when he prays, is heard. so they may not become discouraged.
Whoever reveres his father will live a long life;
he who obeys his father brings comfort to his mother. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
My son, take care of your father when he is old; ALLELUIA (Colossians 3:15a, 16a)
grieve him not as long as he lives.
Even if his mind fail, be considerate of him; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
revile him not all the days of his life;
kindness to a father will not be forgotten, Let the peace of Christ control your hearts;
firmly planted against the debt of your sins let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.—R.
—a house raised in justice to you.
GOSPEL—C (Lk 2:41-52)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 128:1-2, 3, 4-5)
EACH year Jesus’ parents went to Jerusalem for the feast
R. (cf. 1) Blessed are those who fear the Lord and walk in his ways. of Passover,
and when he was twelve years old,
Blessed is everyone who fears the LORD, they went up according to festival custom.
who walks in his ways! After they had completed its days, as they were returning,
For you shall eat the fruit of your handiwork; the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem,
blessed shall you be, and favored.—R. but his parents did not know it.
Thinking that he was in the caravan,
Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine they journeyed for a day
in the recesses of your home; and looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances,
your children like olive plants but not finding him,
around your table.—R. they returned to Jerusalem to look for him.
After three days they found him in the temple,
Behold, thus is the man blessed sitting in the midst of the teachers,
who fears the LORD. listening to them and asking them questions,
The LORD bless you from Zion: and all who heard him were astounded
may you see the prosperity of Jerusalem at his understanding and his answers.
all the days of your life.—R. When his parents saw him,
they were astonished,
SECOND READING (Col 3:12-21 or 3:12-17) and his mother said to him,
“Son, why have you done this to us?
[ Shorter form in brackets. ] Your father and I have been looking for you with great anxiety.”
And he said to them,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Colossians: “Why were you looking for me?
Did you not know that I must be in my Father’s house?”
[ BROTHERS and sisters: But they did not understand what he said to them.
Put on, as God’s chosen ones, holy and beloved, He went down with them and came to Nazareth,
heartfelt compassion, kindness, humility, gentleness, and patience, and was obedient to them;
bearing with one another and forgiving one another, and his mother kept all these things in her heart.
if one has a grievance against another; And Jesus advanced in wisdom and age and favor
as the Lord has forgiven you, so must you also do. before God and man.
And over all these put on love,
that is, the bond of perfection. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
And let the peace of Christ control your hearts,
the peace into which you were also called in one body.
And be thankful.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 37 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and as countless as the sands on the seashore.
HOLY FAMILY (Year B Option)
By faith Abraham, when put to the test, offered up Isaac,
and he who had received the promises was ready to offer
In Year B, these readings may be used: his only son,
of whom it was said,
“Through Isaac descendants shall bear your name.”
FIRST READING (Gn 15:1-6; 21:1-3) He reasoned that God was able to raise even from the dead,
and he received Isaac back as a symbol.
A reading from the Book of Genesis:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
THE word of the LORD came to Abram in a vision, saying:
“Fear not, Abram! ALLELUIA (Hebrews 1:1-2)
I am your shield;
I will make your reward very great.” R. Alleluia, alleluia.
But Abram said,
“O Lord GOD, what good will your gifts be, In the past God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets;
if I keep on being childless in these last days, he has spoken to us through the Son.—R.
and have as my heir the steward of my house, Eliezer?”
Abram continued, GOSPEL (Lk 2:22-40 or 2:22, 39-40)
“See, you have given me no offspring,
and so one of my servants will be my heir.” + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
Then the word of the LORD came to him:
“No, that one shall not be your heir; [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
your own issue shall be your heir.”
The Lord took Abram outside and said, [ WHEN the days were completed for their purification
“Look up at the sky and count the stars, if you can. according to the law of Moses,
Just so,” he added, “shall your descendants be.” They took him up to Jerusalem
Abram put his faith in the LORD, to present him to the Lord, ]
who credited it to him as an act of righteousness. just as it is written in the law of the Lord,
Every male that opens the womb shall be consecrated to the Lord,
The LORD took note of Sarah as he had said he would; and to offer the sacrifice of
he did for her as he had promised. a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons,
Sarah became pregnant and bore Abraham a son in his old age, in accordance with the dictate in the law of the Lord.
at the set time that God had stated.
Abraham gave the name Isaac to this son of his Now there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon.
whom Sarah bore him. This man was righteous and devout,
awaiting the consolation of Israel,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 105:1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 8-9) that he should not see death
before he had seen the Christ of the Lord.
R. (7a , 8a) The Lord remembers his covenant for ever. He came in the Spirit into the temple;
and when the parents brought in the child Jesus
Give thanks to the LORD, invoke his name; to perform the custom of the law in regard to him,
make known among the nations his deeds. He took him into his arms and blessed God, saying:
Sing to him, sing his praise, “Now, Master, you may let your servant go
proclaim all his wondrous deeds.—R. in peace, according to your word,
for my eyes have seen your salvation,
Glory in his holy name; which you prepared in sight of all the peoples,
rejoice, O hearts that seek the LORD! a light for revelation to the Gentiles,
Look to the LORD in his strength; and glory for your people Israel.”
constantly seek his face.—R. The child’s father and mother were amazed at what was said about him;
and Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother,
You descendants of Abraham, his servants, “Behold, this child is destined
sons of Jacob, his chosen ones! for the fall and rise of many in Israel,
He, the LORD, is our God; and to be a sign that will be contradicted
throughout the earth his judgments prevail.—R. —and you yourself a sword will pierce—
so that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.”
He remembers forever his covenant There was also a prophetess, Anna,
which he made binding for a thousand generations the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher.
which he entered into with Abraham She was advanced in years,
and by his oath to Isaac.—R. having lived seven years with her husband after her marriage,
and then as a widow until she was eighty-four.
SECOND READING (Heb 11:8, 11-12, 17-19) She never left the temple,
but worshiped night and day with fasting and prayer.
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews: And coming forward at that very time,
she gave thanks to God and spoke about the child
BROTHERS and sisters: to all who were awaiting the redemption of Jerusalem.
By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to a place
that he was to receive as an inheritance; [ When they had fulfilled all the prescriptions
he went out, not knowing where he was to go. of the law of the Lord,
By faith he received power to generate, they returned to Galilee,
even though he was past the normal age to their own town of Nazareth.
—and Sarah herself was sterile— The child grew and became strong, filled with wisdom;
for he thought that the one who had made the promise was trustworthy. and the favor of God was upon him. ]
So it was that there came forth from one man,
himself as good as dead, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 38 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS what we shall be has not yet been revealed.
HOLY FAMILY (Year C Option) We do know that when it is revealed we shall be like him,
for we shall see him as he is.
In Year C, these readings may be used:
Beloved, if our hearts do not condemn us,
we have confidence in God and receive from him whatever we ask,
FIRST READING (1 Sam 1:20-22, 24-28) because we keep his commandments and do what pleases him.
And his commandment is this:
A reading from the first Book of Samuel: we should believe in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ,
and love one another just as he commanded us.
IN those days Hannah conceived, and at the end of her term bore a son Those who keep his commandments remain in him, and he in them,
whom she called Samuel, since she had asked the LORD for him. and the way we know that he remains in us
The next time her husband Elkanah was going up is from the Spirit he gave us.
with the rest of his household
to offer the customary sacrifice to the LORD and to fulfill his vows, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Hannah did not go, explaining to her husband,
“Once the child is weaned, ALLELUIA (cf. Acts 16:14b)
I will take him to appear before the LORD
and to remain there forever; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
I will offer him as a perpetual nazirite.”
Open our hearts, O Lord,
Once Samuel was weaned, Hannah brought him up with her, to listen to the words of your Son.—R.
along with a three-year-old bull,
an ephah of flour, and a skin of wine, GOSPEL (Lk 2:41-52)
and presented him at the temple of the LORD in Shiloh.
After the boy’s father had sacrificed the young bull, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
Hannah, his mother, approached Eli and said:
“Pardon, my lord! EACH year Jesus’ parents went to Jerusalem for the feast
As you live, my lord, of Passover,
I am the woman who stood near you here, praying to the LORD. and when he was twelve years old,
I prayed for this child, and the LORD granted my request. they went up according to festival custom.
Now I, in turn, give him to the LORD; After they had completed its days, as they were returning,
as long as he lives, he shall be dedicated to the LORD.” the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem,
Hannah left Samuel there. but his parents did not know it.
Thinking that he was in the caravan,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. they journeyed for a day
and looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 84:2-3, 5-6, 9-10) but not finding him,
they returned to Jerusalem to look for him.
R. (cf. 5a) Blessed are they who dwell in your house, O Lord. After three days they found him in the temple,
sitting in the midst of the teachers,
How lovely is your dwelling place, O LORD of hosts! listening to them and asking them questions,
My soul yearns and pines for the courts of the LORD. and all who heard him were astounded
My heart and my flesh cry out for the living God.—R. at his understanding and his answers.
When his parents saw him,
Happy they who dwell in your house! they were astonished,
Continually they praise you. and his mother said to him,
Happy the men whose strength you are! “Son, why have you done this to us?
Their hearts are set upon the pilgrimage.—R. Your father and I have been looking for you with great anxiety.”
And he said to them,
O LORD of hosts, hear our prayer; “Why were you looking for me?
hearken, O God of Jacob! Did you not know that I must be in my Father’s house?”
O God, behold our shield, But they did not understand what he said to them.
and look upon the face of your anointed.—R. He went down with them and came to Nazareth,
and was obedient to them;
SECOND READING (1 Jn 3:1-2, 21-24) and his mother kept all these things in her heart.
And Jesus advanced in wisdom and age and favor
A reading from the first Letter of Saint John: before God and man.
BELOVED: The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
See what love the Father has bestowed on us
that we may be called the children of God.
And so we are.
The reason the world does not know us
is that it did not know him.
Beloved, we are God’s children now;
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 39 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS as it has now been revealed
EPIPHANY OF THE LORD—ABC to his holy apostles and prophets by the Spirit:
that the Gentiles are coheirs, members of the same body,
and copartners in the promise in Christ Jesus through the gospel.
FIRST READING (Is 60:1-6)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
ALLELUIA (Matthew 2:2)
RISE up in splendor, Jerusalem! Your light has come,
the glory of the Lord shines upon you. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
See, darkness covers the earth,
and thick clouds cover the peoples; We saw his star at its rising
but upon you the LORD shines, and have come to do him homage.—R.
and over you appears his glory.
Nations shall walk by your light, GOSPEL (Mt 2:1-12)
and kings by your shining radiance.
Raise your eyes and look about; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
they all gather and come to you:
your sons come from afar, WHEN Jesus was born in Bethlehem of Judea,
and your daughters in the arms of their nurses. in the days of King Herod,
behold, magi from the east arrived in Jerusalem, saying,
Then you shall be radiant at what you see, “Where is the newborn king of the Jews?
your heart shall throb and overflow, We saw his star at its rising
for the riches of the sea shall be emptied out before you, and have come to do him homage.”
the wealth of nations shall be brought to you. When King Herod heard this,
Caravans of camels shall fill you, he was greatly troubled,
dromedaries from Midian and Ephah; and all Jerusalem with him.
all from Sheba shall come Assembling all the chief priests and the scribes of the people,
bearing gold and frankincense, He inquired of them where the Christ was to be born.
and proclaiming the praises of the LORD. said to him, “In Bethlehem of Judea,
for thus it has been written through the prophet:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. And you, Bethlehem, land of Judah,
are by no means least among the rulers of Judah;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 72:1-2, 7-8, 10-11, 12-13) since from you shall come a ruler,
who is to shepherd my people Israel.”
R. (cf. 11) Lord, every nation on earth will adore you. Then Herod called the magi secretly
and ascertained from them the time of the star’s appearance.
O God, with your judgment endow the king, He sent them to Bethlehem and said,
and with your justice, the king’s son; “Go and search diligently for the child.
He shall govern your people with justice When you have found him, bring me word,
and your afflicted ones with judgment.—R. that I too may go and do him homage.”
After their audience with the king they set out.
Justice shall flower in his days, And behold, the star that they had seen at its rising preceded them,
and profound peace, till the moon be no more. until it came and stopped over the place where the child was.
May he rule from sea to sea, They were overjoyed at seeing the star,
and from the River to the ends of the earth.—R. and on entering the house
they saw the child with Mary his mother.
The kings of Tarshish and the Isles shall offer gifts; They prostrated themselves and did him homage.
the kings of Arabia and Seba shall bring tribute. Then they opened their treasures
All kings shall pay him homage, and offered him gifts of gold, frankincense, and myrrh.
all nations shall serve him.—R. And having been warned in a dream not to return to Herod,
they departed for their country by another way.
For he shall rescue the poor when he cries out,
and the afflicted when he has no one to help him. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
He shall have pity for the lowly and the poor;
the lives of the poor he shall save.—R.
SECOND READING (Eph 3:2-3a, 5-6)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
You have heard of the stewardship of God’s grace
that was given to me for your benefit,
namely, that the mystery was made known to me by revelation.
It was not made known to people in other generations
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 40 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and of your love for all the holy ones,
SECOND SUNDAY AFTER CHRISTMAS—ABC do not cease giving thanks for you,
remembering you in my prayers,
that the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory,
may give you a Spirit of wisdom and revelation
FIRST READING (Sir 24:1-2, 8-12)
resulting in knowledge of him.
May the eyes of your hearts be enlightened,
A reading from the Book of Sirach:
that you may know what is the hope that belongs to his call,
what are the riches of glory
WISDOM sings her own praises and is honored in God,
in his inheritance among the holy ones.
before her own people she boasts;
in the assembly of the Most High she opens her mouth,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
in the presence of his power she declares her worth,
in the midst of her people she is exalted,
ALLELUIA (cf. 1 Timothy 3:16)
in holy fullness she is admired;
in the multitude of the chosen she finds praise,
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and among the blessed she is blessed.
Glory to you, O Christ, proclaimed to the Gentiles;
“The Creator of all commanded and said to me,
Glory to you, O Christ, believed in throughout the world!—R.
and he who formed me chose the spot for my tent,
saying, ‘In Jacob make your dwelling,
GOSPEL (Jn 1:1-18 or 1:1-5, 9-14)
in Israel your inheritance,
and among my chosen put down your roots’.
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
Before all ages, in the beginning, he created me,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and through all ages I shall not cease to be.
In the holy tent I ministered before him,
[ IN the beginning was the Word,
and in Zion I fixed my abode.
and the Word was with God,
Thus in the chosen city I have rested,
and the Word was God.
in Jerusalem is my domain.
He was in the beginning with God.
I have struck root among a glorious people,
All things came to be through him,
in the portion of the LORD, his heritage;
and without him nothing came to be.
and in the company of the holy ones do I linger.”
What came to be through him was life,
and this life was the light of the human race;
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
the light shines in the darkness,
and the darkness has not overcome it. ]
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 147:12-13, 14-15, 19-20)
A man named John was sent from God.
He came for testimony, to testify to the light,
R. (John 1:4) The Word of God became man and lived among us.
so that all might believe through him.
or:
He was not the light,
R. Alleluia.
but came to testify to the light.
[ The true light, which enlightens everyone, was coming into the world.
Glorify the LORD, O Jerusalem;
He was in the world,
praise your God, O Zion.
and the world came to be through him,
For he has strengthened the bars of your gates;
but the world did not know him.
he has blessed your children within you.—R.
He came to what was his own,
but his own people did not accept him.
He has granted peace in your borders;
with the best of wheat he fills you.
But to those who did accept him
He sends forth his command to the earth;
he gave power to become children of God,
swiftly runs his word!—R.
to those who believe in his name,
who were born not by natural generation
He has proclaimed his word to Jacob,
nor by human choice nor by man’s decision
his statutes and his ordinances to Israel.
but of God.
He has not done thus for any other nation;
And the Word became flesh
his ordinances he has not made known to them. Alleluia.—R.
and made his dwelling among us,
and we saw his glory,
SECOND READING (Eph 1:3-6, 15-18)
the glory as of the Father’s only Son,
full of grace and truth. ]
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians
John testified to him and cried out, saying,
“This was he of whom I said,
BLESSED be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
‘The one who is coming after me ranks ahead of me
who has blessed us in Christ
because he existed before me.’”
with every spiritual blessing in the heavens,
From his fullness we have all received,
as he chose us in him, before the foundation of the world,
grace in place of grace,
to be holy and without blemish before him.
because while the law was given through Moses,
In love he destined us for adoption to himself through Jesus Christ,
grace and truth came through Jesus Christ.
in accord with the favor of his will,
No one has ever seen God.
for the praise of the glory of his grace
The only Son, God, who is at the Father’s side,
that he granted us in the beloved.
has revealed him.
Therefore, I, too, hearing of your faith in the Lord Jesus
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 41 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (cf. Mark 9:7)
THE BAPTISM OF THE LORD—ABC
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
(First Sunday in Ordinary Time)
The heavens were opened and the voice of the Father thundered:
This is my beloved Son, listen to him.—R.
FIRST READING (Is 42:1-4, 6-7)
GOSPEL—A (Mt 3:13-17)
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
THUS says the LORD:
Here is my servant whom I uphold,
JESUS came from Galilee to John at the Jordan
my chosen one with whom I am pleased,
to be baptized by him.
upon whom I have put my spirit;
John tried to prevent him, saying,
he shall bring forth justice to the nations,
“I need to be baptized by you,
not crying out, not shouting,
and yet you are coming to me?”
not making his voice heard in the street.
Jesus said to him in reply,
a bruised reed he shall not break,
“Allow it now, for thus it is fitting for us
and a smoldering wick he shall not quench,
to fulfill all righteousness.”
until he establishes justice on the earth;
Then he allowed him.
the coastlands will wait for his teaching.
After Jesus was baptized,
he came up from the water and behold,
I, the LORD, have called you for the victory of justice,
the heavens were opened for him,
I have grasped you by the hand;
and he saw the Spirit of God descending like a dove
I formed you, and set you
and coming upon him.
as a covenant of the people,
And a voice came from the heavens, saying,
a light for the nations,
“This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased.”
to open the eyes of the blind,
to bring out prisoners from confinement,
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and from the dungeon, those who live in darkness.
GOSPEL—B (Mk 1:7-11)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 29:1-2, 3-4, 3, 9-10)
THIS is what he proclaimed:
R. (11b) The Lord will bless his people with peace.
“One mightier than I is coming after me.
I am not worthy to stoop and loosen the thongs of his sandals.
Give to the LORD, you sons of God,
I have baptized you with water;
give to the LORD glory and praise,
he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”
Give to the LORD the glory due his name;
adore the LORD in holy attire.—R.
It happened in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee
and was baptized in the Jordan by John.
The voice of the LORD is over the waters,
On coming up out of the water he saw the heavens being torn open
the LORD, over vast waters.
and the Spirit, like a dove, descending upon him.
The voice of the LORD is mighty;
And a voice came from the heavens,
the voice of the LORD is majestic.—R.
“You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.”
The God of glory thunders,
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and in his temple all say, “Glory!”
The LORD is enthroned above the flood;
GOSPEL—C (Lk 3:15-16, 21-22)
the LORD is enthroned as king forever.—R.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
SECOND READING (Acts 10:34-38)
THE people were filled with expectation,
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
and all were asking in their hearts
whether John might be the Christ.
PETER proceeded to speak to those gathered
John answered them all, saying,
in the house of Cornelius, saying:
“I am baptizing you with water,
“In truth, I see that God shows no partiality.
but one mightier than I is coming.
Rather, in every nation whoever fears him and acts uprightly
I am not worthy to loosen the thongs of his sandals.
is acceptable to him.
He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.”
You know the word that he sent to the Israelites
as he proclaimed peace through Jesus Christ, who is Lord of all,
After all the people had been baptized
what has happened all over Judea,
and Jesus also had been baptized and was praying,
beginning in Galilee after the baptism
heaven was opened and the Holy Spirit descended upon him
that John preached,
in bodily form like a dove.
how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth
And a voice came from heaven,
with the Holy Spirit and power.
“You are my beloved Son;
He went about doing good
with you I am well pleased.”
and healing all those oppressed by the devil,
for God was with him.”
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 42 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS at the fountain of salvation.—R.
THE BAPTISM OF THE LORD (First Sunday in Ordinary Time)
Give thanks to the LORD, acclaim his name;
In Year B, these readings may be used: among the nations make known his deeds,
proclaim how exalted is his name.—R.
FIRST READING (Is 55:1-11) Sing praise to the LORD for his glorious achievement;
let this be known throughout all the earth.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: Shout with exultation, O city of Zion,
for great in your midst
THUS says the LORD: is the Holy One of Israel!—R.
All you who are thirsty,
come to the water! SECOND READING (1 Jn 5:1-9)
You who have no money,
come, receive grain and eat; A reading from the first Letter of Saint John:
come, without paying and without cost,
drink wine and milk! BELOVED:
Why spend your money for what is not bread, Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten by God,
your wages for what fails to satisfy? and everyone who loves the Father
Heed me, and you shall eat well, loves also the one begotten by him.
you shall delight in rich fare. In this way we know that we love the children of God
Come to me heedfully, when we love God and obey his commandments.
listen, that you may have life. For the love of God is this,
I will renew with you the everlasting covenant, that we keep his commandments.
the benefits assured to David. And his commandments are not burdensome,
As I made him a witness to the peoples, for whoever is begotten by God conquers the world.
a leader and commander of nations, And the victory that conquers the world is our faith.
so shall you summon a nation you knew not, Who indeed is the victor over the world
and nations that knew you not shall run to you, but the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
because of the LORD, your God, This is the one who came through water and blood, Jesus Christ,
the Holy One of Israel, who has glorified you. not by water alone, but by water and blood.
The Spirit is the one who testifies,
Seek the LORD while he may be found, and the Spirit is truth.
call him while he is near. So there are three that testify,
Let the scoundrel forsake his way, the Spirit, the water, and the blood,
and the wicked man his thoughts; and the three are of one accord.
let him turn to the LORD for mercy; If we accept human testimony,
to our God, who is generous in forgiving. the testimony of God is surely greater.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, Now the testimony of God is this,
nor are your ways my ways, says the LORD. that he has testified on behalf of his Son.
As high as the heavens are above the earth
so high are my ways above your ways The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and my thoughts above your thoughts.
ALLELUIA (cf. John 1:29)
For just as from the heavens
the rain and snow come down R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and do not return there
till they have watered the earth, John saw Jesus approaching him, and said:
making it fertile and fruitful, Behold the Lamb of God who takes away the sin of the world.—R.
giving seed to the one who sows
and bread to the one who eats, GOSPEL (Mk 1:7-11)
so shall my word be
that goes forth from my mouth; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
my word shall not return to me void,
but shall do my will, THIS is what John the Baptist proclaimed:
achieving the end for which I sent it. “One mightier than I is coming after me.
I am not worthy to stoop and loosen the thongs of his sandals.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. I have baptized you with water;
he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Isaiah 12:2-3, 4bcd, 5-6)
It happened in those days that Jesus came from Nazareth of Galilee
R. (3) You will draw water joyfully from the springs of salvation. and was baptized in the Jordan by John.
On coming up out of the water he saw the heavens being torn open
God indeed is my savior; and the Spirit, like a dove, descending upon him.
I am confident and unafraid. And a voice came from the heavens,
My strength and my courage is the LORD, “You are my beloved Son; with you I am well pleased.”
and he has been my savior.
With joy you will draw water The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 43 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS of living things both small and great.—R.
THE BAPTISM OF THE LORD (First Sunday in Ordinary Time)
They look to you to give them food in due time.
In Year C, these readings may be used: When you give it to them, they gather it;
when you open your hand, they are filled with good things.—R.
FIRST READING (Is 40:1-5, 9-11) If you take away their breath, they perish and return to the dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
COMFORT, give comfort to my people, SECOND READING (Ti 2:11-14; 3:4-7)
says your God.
Speak tenderly to Jerusalem, and proclaim to her A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to Titus:
that her service is at an end,
her guilt is expiated; BELOVED:
indeed, she has received from the hand of the LORD The grace of God has appeared, saving all
double for all her sins. and training us to reject godless ways and worldly desires
and to live temperately, justly, and devoutly in this age,
A voice cries out: as we await the blessed hope,
In the desert prepare the way of the LORD! the appearance of the glory of our great God
Make straight in the wasteland a highway for our God! and savior Jesus Christ,
Every valley shall be filled in, who gave himself for us to deliver us from all lawlessness
every mountain and hill shall be made low; and to cleanse for himself a people as his own,
the rugged land shall be made a plain, eager to do what is good.
the rough country, a broad valley.
Then the glory of the LORD shall be revealed, When the kindness and generous love
and all people shall see it together; of God our savior appeared,
for the mouth of the LORD has spoken. not because of any righteous deeds we had done
but because of his mercy,
Go up on to a high mountain, He saved us through the bath of rebirth
Zion, herald of glad tidings; and renewal by the Holy Spirit,
cry out at the top of your voice, whom he richly poured out on us
Jerusalem, herald of good news! through Jesus Christ our savior,
Fear not to cry out so that we might be justified by his grace
and say to the cities of Judah: and become heirs in hope of eternal life.
Here is your God!
Here comes with power The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
the Lord GOD,
who rules by a strong arm; ALLELUIA (cf. Luke 3:16)
here is his reward with him,
his recompense before him. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Like a shepherd he feeds his flock;
in his arms he gathers the lambs, John said: One mightier than I is coming;
carrying them in his bosom, he will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and with fire.—R.
and leading the ewes with care.
GOSPEL (Lk 3:15-16, 21-22)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1b-2, 3-4, 24-25, 27-28, 29-30)
THE people were filled with expectation,
R. (1) O bless the Lord, my soul. and all were asking in their hearts
whether John might be the Christ.
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! John answered them all, saying,
you are clothed with majesty and glory, “I am baptizing you with water,
robed in light as with a cloak. but one mightier than I is coming.
You have spread out the heavens like a tent-cloth;—R. I am not worthy to loosen the thongs of his sandals.
He will baptize you with the Holy Spirit and fire.”
You have constructed your palace upon the waters.
You make the clouds your chariot; After all the people had been baptized
you travel on the wings of the wind. and Jesus also had been baptized and was praying,
You make the winds your messengers, heaven was opened and the Holy Spirit descended upon him
and flaming fire your ministers.—R. in bodily form like a dove.
And a voice came from heaven,
How manifold are your works, O LORD! “You are my beloved Son;
In wisdom you have wrought them all— with you I am well pleased.”
the earth is full of your creatures;
the sea also, great and wide, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
in which are schools without number
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 44 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (2 Cor 5:20–6:2)
ASH WEDNESDAY—ABC
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
FIRST READING (Jl 2:12-18)
We are ambassadors for Christ,
as if God were appealing through us.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Joel:
We implore you on behalf of Christ,
be reconciled to God.
EVEN now, says the LORD,
For our sake he made him to be sin who did not know sin,
return to me with your whole heart,
so that we might become the righteousness of God in him.
with fasting, and weeping, and mourning;
Rend your hearts, not your garments,
Working together, then,
and return to the LORD, your God.
we appeal to you not to receive the grace of God in vain.
For gracious and merciful is he,
For he says:
slow to anger, rich in kindness,
and relenting in punishment.
In an acceptable time I heard you,
Perhaps he will again relent and on the day of salvation I helped you.
and leave behind him a blessing,
Offerings and libations Behold, now is a very acceptable time;
for the LORD, your God. behold, now is the day of salvation.
Blow the trumpet in Zion! The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
proclaim a fast,
call an assembly; VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (See Psalm 95:8)
Gather the people,
notify the congregation; If today you hear his voice,
Assemble the elders, harden not your hearts.
gather the children
and the infants at the breast; GOSPEL (Mt 6:1-6, 16-18)
Let the bridegroom quit his room
and the bride her chamber. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
Between the porch and the altar
let the priests, the ministers of the LORD, weep, JESUS said to his disciples:
And say, “Spare, O LORD, your people, “Take care not to perform righteous deeds
and make not your heritage a reproach, in order that people may see them;
with the nations ruling over them! otherwise, you will have no recompense from your heavenly Father.
Why should they say among the peoples, When you give alms,
‘Where is their God?’” do not blow a trumpet before you,
as the hypocrites do in the synagogues and in the streets
Then the LORD was stirred to concern for his land to win the praise of others.
and took pity on his people. Amen, I say to you,
they have received their reward.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. But when you give alms,
do not let your left hand know what your right is doing,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 51:3-4, 5-6ab, 12-13, 14 and 17) so that your almsgiving may be secret.
And your Father who sees in secret will repay you.
R. (see 3a) Be merciful, O Lord, for we have sinned.
“When you pray,
Have mercy on me, O God, in your goodness; do not be like the hypocrites,
who love to stand and pray in the synagogues and on street corners
in the greatness of your compassion wipe out my offense.
so that others may see them.
Thoroughly wash me from my guilt
Amen, I say to you,
and of my sin cleanse me.—R.
they have received their reward.
But when you pray, go to your inner room,
For I acknowledge my offense,
close the door, and pray to your Father in secret.
and my sin is before me always:
And your Father who sees in secret will repay you.
“Against you only have I sinned,
and done what is evil in your sight.”—R.
“When you fast,
do not look gloomy like the hypocrites.
A clean heart create for me, O God,
They neglect their appearance,
and a steadfast spirit renew within me.
so that they may appear to others to be fasting.
Cast me not out from your presence,
Amen, I say to you, they have received their reward.
and your Holy Spirit take not from me.—R.
But when you fast,
anoint your head and wash your face,
Give me back the joy of your salvation,
so that you may not appear to be fasting,
and a willing spirit sustain in me.
except to your Father who is hidden.
O Lord, open my lips,
And your Father who sees what is hidden will repay you.”
and my mouth shall proclaim your praise.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 45 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS for up to the time of the law, sin was in the world,
though sin is not accounted when there is no law.
FIRST SUNDAY OF LENT—A
But death reigned from Adam to Moses,
even over those who did not sin
after the pattern of the trespass of Adam,
FIRST READING (Gn 2:7-9; 3:1-7) who is the type of the one who was to come.
A reading from the Book of Genesis: But the gift is not like the transgression.
For if by the transgression of the one, the many died,
THE LORD God formed man out of the clay of the ground how much more did the grace of God
and blew into his nostrils the breath of life, and the gracious gift of the one man Jesus Christ
and so man became a living being. overflow for the many.
And the gift is not like the result of the one who sinned.
Then the LORD God planted a garden in Eden, in the east, For after one sin there was the judgment that brought condemnation;
and placed there the man whom he had formed. but the gift, after many transgressions, brought acquittal.
Out of the ground the LORD God made various trees grow [ For if, by the transgression of the one,
that were delightful to look at and good for food, death came to reign through that one,
with the tree of life in the middle of the garden how much more will those who receive the abundance of grace
and the tree of the knowledge of good and evil. and of the gift of justification
come to reign in life through the one Jesus Christ.
Now the serpent was the most cunning of all the animals In conclusion, just as through one transgression
that the LORD God had made. condemnation came upon all,
The serpent asked the woman, so, through one righteous act,
“Did God really tell you not to eat acquittal and life came to all.
from any of the trees in the garden?” For just as through the disobedience of the one man
The woman answered the serpent: the many were made sinners,
“We may eat of the fruit of the trees in the garden; so, through the obedience of the one,
it is only about the fruit of the tree the many will be made righteous. ]
in the middle of the garden that God said,
‘You shall not eat it or even touch it, lest you die.’” The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
But the serpent said to the woman:
“You certainly will not die! VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Matthew 4:4b)
No, God knows well that the moment you eat of it
your eyes will be opened and you will be like gods R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
who know what is good and what is evil.”
The woman saw that the tree was good for food, One does not live on bread alone,
pleasing to the eyes, and desirable for gaining wisdom. but on every word that comes forth from the mouth of God.—R.
So she took some of its fruit and ate it;
and she also gave some to her husband, who was with her, GOSPEL (Mt 4:1-11)
and he ate it.
Then the eyes of both of them were opened, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
and they realized that they were naked;
so they sewed fig leaves together AT that time Jesus was led by the Spirit into the desert
and made loincloths for themselves. to be tempted by the devil.
He fasted for forty days and forty nights,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and afterwards he was hungry.
The tempter approached and said to him,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 51:3-4, 5-6, 12-13, 17) “If you are the Son of God,
command that these stones become loaves of bread.”
R. (cf. 3a) Be merciful, O Lord, for we have sinned. He said in reply,
“It is written:
Have mercy on me, O God, in your goodness; One does not live on bread alone,
in the greatness of your compassion wipe out my offense. but on every word that comes forth
Thoroughly wash me from my guilt from the mouth of God.”
and of my sin cleanse me.—R.
Then the devil took him to the holy city,
For I acknowledge my offense, and made him stand on the parapet of the temple,
and my sin is before me always: and said to him, “If you are the Son of God, throw yourself down.
“Against you only have I sinned, For it is written:
and done what is evil in your sight.”—R. He will command his angels concerning you’
and ‘with their hands they will support you,
A clean heart create for me, O God, lest you dash your foot against a stone.”
and a steadfast spirit renew within me. Jesus answered him,
Cast me not out from your presence, “Again it is written,
and your Holy spirit take not from me.—R. You shall not put the Lord, your God, to the test.”
Then the devil took him up to a very high mountain,
Give me back the joy of your salvation, and showed him all the kingdoms of the world in their magnificence,
and a willing spirit sustain in me. and he said to him, “All these I shall give to you,
O Lord, open my lips, if you will prostrate yourself and worship me.”
and my mouth shall proclaim your praise.—R. At this, Jesus said to him,
“Get away, Satan!
SECOND READING (Rom 5:12-19 or 5:12, 17-19) It is written:
The Lord, your God, shall you worship
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: and him alone shall you serve.”
[ Shorter form in brackets. ] Then the devil left him and, behold,
angels came and ministered to him.
[ BROTHERS and sisters:
Through one man sin entered the world, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and through sin, death,
and thus death came to all men, inasmuch as all sinned — ]
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 46 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS during the building of the ark,
FIRST SUNDAY OF LENT—B in which a few persons, eight in all,
were saved through water.
This prefigured baptism, which saves you now.
FIRST READING (Gn 9:8-15) It is not a removal of dirt from the body
but an appeal to God for a clear conscience,
A reading from the Book of Genesis: through the resurrection of Jesus Christ,
who has gone into heaven
GOD said to Noah and to his sons with him: and is at the right hand of God,
“See, I am now establishing my covenant with you with angels, authorities, and powers subject to him.
and your descendants after you
and with every living creature that was with you: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
all the birds, and the various tame and wild animals
that were with you and came out of the ark. VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Mt Matthew 4:4b)
I will establish my covenant with you,
that never again shall all bodily creatures be destroyed R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
by the waters of a flood;
there shall not be another flood to devastate the earth.” One does not live on bread alone,
God added: but on every word that comes forth from the mouth of God.—R.
“This is the sign that I am giving for all ages to come,
of the covenant between me and you GOSPEL (Mk 1:12-15)
and every living creature with you:
I set my bow in the clouds to serve as a sign + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
of the covenant between me and the earth.
When I bring clouds over the earth, THE Spirit drove Jesus out into the desert,
and the bow appears in the clouds, and he remained in the desert for forty days,
I will recall the covenant I have made tempted by Satan.
between me and you and all living beings, He was among wild beasts,
so that the waters shall never again become a flood and the angels ministered to him.
to destroy all mortal beings.”
After John had been arrested,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Jesus came to Galilee proclaiming the gospel of God:
“This is the time of fulfillment.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 25:4-5, 6-7, 8-9) The kingdom of God is at hand.
Repent, and believe in the gospel.”
R. (cf. 10) Your ways, O Lord, are love and truth to those who keep
your covenant. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Your ways, O LORD, make known to me;
teach me your paths,
Guide me in your truth and teach me,
for you are God my savior.—R.
Remember that your compassion, O LORD,
and your love are from of old.
In your kindness remember me,
because of your goodness, O LORD.—R.
Good and upright is the LORD,
thus he shows sinners the way.
He guides the humble to justice,
and he teaches the humble his way.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Pt 3:18-22)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Peter:
BELOVED:
Christ suffered for sins once,
the righteous for the sake of the unrighteous,
that he might lead you to God.
Put to death in the flesh,
he was brought to life in the Spirit.
In it he also went to preach to the spirits in prison,
who had once been disobedient
while God patiently waited in the days of Noah
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 47 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS The word is near you,
FIRST SUNDAY OF LENT—C in your mouth and in your heart
— that is, the word of faith that we preach —,
for, if you confess with your mouth that Jesus is Lord
FIRST READING (Dt 26:4-10) and believe in your heart that God raised him from the dead,
you will be saved.
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy: For one believes with the heart and so is justified,
and one confesses with the mouth and so is saved.
MOSES spoke to the people, saying: For the Scripture says,
“The priest shall receive the basket from you No one who believes in him will be put to shame.
and shall set it in front of the altar of the LORD, your God. For there is no distinction between Jew and Greek;
Then you shall declare before the Lord, your God, the same Lord is Lord of all,
‘My father was a wandering Aramean enriching all who call upon him.
who went down to Egypt with a small household For “everyone who calls on the name of the Lord will be saved.”
and lived there as an alien.
But there he became a nation The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
great, strong, and numerous.
When the Egyptians maltreated and oppressed us, VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Matthew 4:4b)
imposing hard labor upon us,
we cried to the LORD, the God of our fathers, R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
and he heard our cry
and saw our affliction, our toil, and our oppression. One does not live on bread alone,
He brought us out of Egypt but on every word that comes forth from the mouth of God.—R.
with his strong hand and outstretched arm,
with terrifying power, with signs and wonders; GOSPEL (Lk 4:1-13)
and bringing us into this country,
he gave us this land flowing with milk and honey. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
Therefore, I have now brought you the firstfruits
of the products of the soil FILLED with the Holy Spirit, Jesus returned from the Jordan
which you, O LORD, have given me.’ and was led by the Spirit into the desert for forty days,
And having set them before the Lord, your God, to be tempted by the devil.
you shall bow down in his presence. He ate nothing during those days,
and when they were over he was hungry.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The devil said to him,
“If you are the Son of God,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 91:1-2, 10-11, 12-13, 14-15) command this stone to become bread.”
Jesus answered him,
R. (cf. 15b) Be with me, Lord, when I am in trouble. “It is written, One does not live on bread alone.”
Then he took him up and showed him
You who dwell in the shelter of the Most High, all the kingdoms of the world in a single instant.
who abide in the shadow of the Almighty, The devil said to him,
say to the LORD, “My refuge and fortress, “I shall give to you all this power and glory;
my God in whom I trust.”—R. for it has been handed over to me,
and I may give it to whomever I wish.
No evil shall befall you, All this will be yours, if you worship me.”
nor shall affliction come near your tent, Jesus said to him in reply,
For to his angels he has given command about you, “It is written:
that they guard you in all your ways.—R. You shall worship the Lord, your God,
and him alone shall you serve.”
Upon their hands they shall bear you up, Then he led him to Jerusalem,
lest you dash your foot against a stone. made him stand on the parapet of the temple, and said to him,
You shall tread upon the asp and the viper; “If you are the Son of God,
you shall trample down the lion and the dragon.—R. throw yourself down from here, for it is written:
He will command his angels concerning you, to guard you,
Because he clings to me, I will deliver him; and:
I will set him on high because he acknowledges my name. With their hands they will support you,
He shall call upon me, and I will answer him; lest you dash your foot against a stone.”
I will be with him in distress; Jesus said to him in reply,
I will deliver him and glorify him.—R. “It also says,
You shall not put the Lord, your God, to the test.”
SECOND READING (Rom 10:8-13) When the devil had finished every temptation,
he departed from him for a time.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
BROTHERS and sisters:
What does Scripture say?
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 48 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS From the shining cloud the Father’s voice is heard:
SECOND SUNDAY OF LENT—A This is my beloved Son, hear him.—R.
GOSPEL (Mt 17:1-9)
FIRST READING (Gn 12:1-4a)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
A reading from the Book of Genesis:
JESUS took Peter, James, and John his brother,
THE LORD said to Abram: and led them up a high mountain by themselves.
“Go forth from the land of your kinsfolk And he was transfigured before them;
and from your father’s house to a land that I will show you. his face shone like the sun
and his clothes became white as light.
“I will make of you a great nation, And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them,
and I will bless you; conversing with him.
I will make your name great, Then Peter said to Jesus in reply,
so that you will be a blessing. “Lord, it is good that we are here.
I will bless those who bless you If you wish, I will make three tents here,
and curse those who curse you. one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
All the communities of the earth While he was still speaking, behold,
shall find blessing in you.” a bright cloud cast a shadow over them,
then from the cloud came a voice that said,
Abram went as the LORD directed him. “This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased;
listen to him.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. When the disciples heard this, they fell prostrate
and were very much afraid.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 33:4-5, 18-19, 20, 22) But Jesus came and touched them, saying,
“Rise, and do not be afraid.”
R. (22) Lord, let your mercy be on us, as we place our trust in you. And when the disciples raised their eyes,
they saw no one else but Jesus alone.
Upright is the word of the LORD,
and all his works are trustworthy. As they were coming down from the mountain,
He loves justice and right; Jesus charged them,
of the kindness of the LORD the earth is full.—R. “Do not tell the vision to anyone
until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.”
See, the eyes of the LORD are upon those who fear him,
upon those who hope for his kindness, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
To deliver them from death
and preserve them in spite of famine.—R.
Our soul waits for the LORD,
who is our help and our shield.
May your kindness, O LORD, be upon us
who have put our hope in you.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Tim 1:8b-10)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy:
BELOVED:
Bear your share of hardship for the gospel
with the strength that comes from God.
He saved us and called us to a holy life,
not according to our works
but according to his own design
and the grace bestowed on us in Christ Jesus before time began,
but now made manifest
through the appearance of our savior Christ Jesus,
who destroyed death and brought life and immortality
to light through the gospel.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (cf. Matthew 17:5)
R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 49 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (Rom 8:31b-34)
SECOND SUNDAY OF LENT—B
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
FIRST READING (Gn 22:1-2, 9a, 10-13, 15-18) BROTHERS and sisters:
If God is for us, who can be against us?
A reading from the Book of Genesis: He who did not spare his own Son
but handed him over for us all,
GOD put Abraham to the test. how will he not also give us everything else along with him?
He called to him, “Abraham!”
“Here I am!” he replied. Who will bring a charge against God’s chosen ones?
Then God said: It is God who acquits us, who will condemn?
“Take your son Isaac, your only one, whom you love, Christ Jesus it is who died—or, rather, was raised—
and go to the land of Moriah. who also is at the right hand of God,
There you shall offer him up as a holocaust who indeed intercedes for us.
on a height that I will point out to you.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
When they came to the place of which God had told him,
Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it. VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (cf. Matthew 17:5)
Then he reached out and took the knife to slaughter his son.
But the LORD’S messenger called to him from heaven, R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
“Abraham, Abraham!”
“Here I am!” he answered. From the shining cloud the Father’s voice is heard:
“Do not lay your hand on the boy,” said the messenger. This is my beloved Son, listen to him.—R.
“Do not do the least thing to him.
I know now how devoted you are to God, GOSPEL (Mk 9:2-10)
since you did not withhold from me your own beloved son.”
As Abraham looked about, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
he spied a ram caught by its horns in the thicket.
So he went and took the ram JESUS took Peter, James, and John
and offered it up as a holocaust in place of his son. and led them up a high mountain apart by themselves.
And he was transfigured before them,
Again the LORD’S messenger called to Abraham from heaven and said: and his clothes became dazzling white,
“I swear by myself, declares the LORD, such as no fuller on earth could bleach them.
that because you acted as you did Then Elijah appeared to them along with Moses,
in not withholding from me your beloved son, and they were conversing with Jesus.
I will bless you abundantly Then Peter said to Jesus in reply,
and make your descendants as countless “Rabbi, it is good that we are here!
as the stars of the sky and the sands of the seashore; Let us make three tents:
your descendants shall take possession one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
of the gates of their enemies, He hardly knew what to say, they were so terrified.
and in your descendants all the nations of the earth Then a cloud came, casting a shadow over them;
shall find blessing— from the cloud came a voice,
all this because you obeyed my command.” “This is my beloved Son. Listen to him.”
Suddenly, looking around, they no longer saw anyone
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. but Jesus alone with them.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 116:10, 15, 16-17, 18-19) As they were coming down from the mountain,
he charged them not to relate what they had seen to anyone,
R. (116:9) I will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living. except when the Son of Man had risen from the dead.
So they kept the matter to themselves,
I believed, even when I said, questioning what rising from the dead meant.
“I am greatly afflicted.”
Precious in the eyes of the LORD The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
is the death of his faithful ones.—R.
O LORD, I am your servant;
I am your servant, the son of your handmaid;
you have loosed my bonds.
To you will I offer sacrifice of thanksgiving,
and I will call upon the name of the LORD.—R.
My vows to the LORD I will pay
in the presence of all his people,
In the courts of the house of the LORD,
in your midst, O Jerusalem.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 50 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
SECOND SUNDAY OF LENT—C
JOIN with others in being imitators of me, brothers and sisters,
and observe those who thus conduct themselves
FIRST READING (Gn 15:5-12, 17-18) according to the model you have in us.
For many, as I have often told you
A reading from the Book of Genesis: and now tell you even in tears,
conduct themselves as enemies of the cross of Christ.
THE Lord God took Abram outside and said, Their end is destruction.
“Look up at the sky and count the stars, if you can. Their God is their stomach;
Just so,” he added, “shall your descendants be.” their glory is in their “shame.”
Abram put his faith in the LORD, Their minds are occupied with earthly things.
who credited it to him as an act of righteousness. [ But our citizenship is in heaven,
and from it we also await a savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.
He then said to him, He will change our lowly body
“I am the LORD who brought you from Ur of the Chaldeans to conform with his glorified body
to give you this land as a possession.” by the power that enables him also
“O Lord GOD,” he asked, to bring all things into subjection to himself.
“how am I to know that I shall possess it?”
He answered him, Therefore, my brothers and sisters,
“Bring me a three-year-old heifer, a three-year-old she-goat, whom I love and long for, my joy and crown,
a three-year-old ram, a turtledove, and a young pigeon.” in this way stand firm in the Lord. ]
Abram brought him all these, split them in two,
and placed each half opposite the other; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
but the birds he did not cut up.
Birds of prey swooped down on the carcasses, VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (cf. Matthew 17:5)
but Abram stayed with them.
As the sun was about to set, a trance fell upon Abram, R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
and a deep, terrifying darkness enveloped him.
From the shining cloud the Father’s voice is heard:
When the sun had set and it was dark, This is my beloved Son, hear him.—R.
there appeared a smoking fire pot and a flaming torch,
which passed between those pieces. GOSPEL (Lk 9:28b-36)
It was on that occasion that the LORD made a covenant with Abram,
saying: “To your descendants I give this land, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
from the Wadi of Egypt to the Great River, the Euphrates.”
JESUS took Peter, John, and James
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and went up the mountain to pray.
While he was praying his face changed in appearance
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 27:1, 7-8, 8-9, 13-14) and his clothing became dazzling white.
And behold, two men were conversing with him, Moses and Elijah,
R. (1a) The Lord is my light and my salvation. who appeared in glory and spoke of his exodus
that he was going to accomplish in Jerusalem.
The LORD is my light and my salvation; Peter and his companions had been overcome by sleep,
whom should I fear? but becoming fully awake,
The LORD is my life’s refuge; they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
of whom should I be afraid?—R. As they were about to part from him, Peter said to Jesus,
“Master, it is good that we are here;
Hear, O LORD, the sound of my call; let us make three tents,
have pity on me, and answer me. one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
you my heart speaks; you my glance seeks.—R. But he did not know what he was saying.
While he was still speaking,
Your presence, O LORD, I seek. a cloud came and cast a shadow over them,
Hide not your face from me; and they became frightened when they entered the cloud.
do not in anger repel your servant. Then from the cloud came a voice that said,
You are my helper: cast me not off.—R. “This is my chosen Son; listen to him.”
After the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone.
I believe that I shall see the bounty of the LORD They fell silent and did not at that time
in the land of the living. tell anyone what they had seen.
Wait for the LORD with courage;
be stouthearted, and wait for the LORD.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
SECOND READING (Phil 3:17-4:1 or 3:20-4:1)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians:
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 51 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts
THIRD SUNDAY OF LENT—A through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us.
For Christ, while we were still helpless,
died at the appointed time for the ungodly.
FIRST READING (Ex 17:3-7) Indeed, only with difficulty does one die for a just person,
though perhaps for a good person one might even find courage to die.
A reading from the Book of Exodus: But God proves his love for us
in that while we were still sinners Christ died for us.
IN those days, in their thirst for water,
the people grumbled against Moses, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
saying, “Why did you ever make us leave Egypt?
Was it just to have us die here of thirst VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (cf. John 4:42, 15)
with our children and our livestock?”
So Moses cried out to the LORD, R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
“What shall I do with this people?
a little more and they will stone me!” Lord, you are truly the Savior of the world;
The LORD answered Moses, give me living water, that I may never thirst again.—R.
“Go over there in front of the people,
along with some of the elders of Israel, GOSPEL (Jn 4:5-42 or 4:5-15, 19b-26, 39a, 40-42)
holding in your hand, as you go,
the staff with which you struck the river. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
I will be standing there in front of you on the rock in Horeb.
Strike the rock, and the water will flow from it [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
for the people to drink.”
This Moses did, in the presence of the elders of Israel. [ JESUS came to a town of Samaria called Sychar,
The place was called Massah and Meribah, near the plot of land that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
because the Israelites quarreled there Jacob’s well was there.
and tested the LORD, saying, Jesus, tired from his journey, sat down there at the well.
“Is the LORD in our midst or not?” It was about noon.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. A woman of Samaria came to draw water.
Jesus said to her,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 95:1-2, 6-7, 8-9) “Give me a drink.”
His disciples had gone into the town to buy food.
R. (8) If today you hear his voice, harden not your hearts. The Samaritan woman said to him,
“How can you, a Jew, ask me, a Samaritan woman, for a drink?”
Come, let us sing joyfully to the LORD; —For Jews use nothing in common with Samaritans.—
let us acclaim the Rock of our salvation. Jesus answered and said to her,
Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving; “If you knew the gift of God
let us joyfully sing psalms to him.—R. and who is saying to you, ‘Give me a drink, ‘
you would have asked him
Come, let us bow down in worship; and he would have given you living water.”
let us kneel before the LORD who made us. The woman said to him,
For he is our God, “Sir, you do not even have a bucket and the cistern is deep;
and we are the people he shepherds, the flock he guides.—R. where then can you get this living water?
Are you greater than our father Jacob,
Oh, that today you would hear his voice: who gave us this cistern and drank from it himself
“Harden not your hearts as at Meribah, with his children and his flocks?”
as in the day of Massah in the desert, Jesus answered and said to her,
Where your fathers tempted me; “Everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again;
they tested me though they had seen my works.”—R. but whoever drinks the water I shall give will never thirst;
the water I shall give will become in him
SECOND READING (Rom 5:1-2, 5-8) a spring of water welling up to eternal life.”
The woman said to him,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: “Sir, give me this water, so that I may not be thirsty
or have to keep coming here to draw water.” ]
BROTHERS and sisters:
Since we have been justified by faith, Jesus said to her,
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, “Go call your husband and come back.”
through whom we have gained access by faith The woman answered and said to him,
to this grace in which we stand, “I do not have a husband.”
and we boast in hope of the glory of God. Jesus answered her,
“You are right in saying, ‘I do not have a husband.’
And hope does not disappoint, For you have had five husbands,
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 52 ---
and the one you have now is not your husband.
What you have said is true.”
The woman said to him,
[ “Sir, I can see that you are a prophet.
Our ancestors worshiped on this mountain;
but you people say that the place to worship is in Jerusalem.”
Jesus said to her,
“Believe me, woman, the hour is coming
when you will worship the Father
neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem.
You people worship what you do not understand;
we worship what we understand,
because salvation is from the Jews.
But the hour is coming, and is now here,
when true worshipers will worship the Father in Spirit and truth;
and indeed the Father seeks such people to worship him.
God is Spirit, and those who worship him
must worship in Spirit and truth.”
The woman said to him,
“I know that the Messiah is coming, the one called the Christ;
when he comes, he will tell us everything.”
Jesus said to her,
“I am he, the one speaking with you.” ]
At that moment his disciples returned,
and were amazed that he was talking with a woman,
but still no one said, “What are you looking for?”
or “Why are you talking with her?”
The woman left her water jar
and went into the town and said to the people,
“Come see a man who told me everything I have done.
Could he possibly be the Christ?”
They went out of the town and came to him.
Meanwhile, the disciples urged him, “Rabbi, eat.”
But he said to them,
“I have food to eat of which you do not know.”
So the disciples said to one another,
“Could someone have brought him something to eat?”
Jesus said to them,
“My food is to do the will of the one who sent me
and to finish his work.
Do you not say, ‘In four months the harvest will be here’?
I tell you, look up and see the fields ripe for the harvest.
The reaper is already receiving payment
and gathering crops for eternal life,
so that the sower and reaper can rejoice together.
For here the saying is verified that ‘One sows and another reaps.’
I sent you to reap what you have not worked for;
others have done the work,
and you are sharing the fruits of their work.”
[ Many of the Samaritans of that town began to believe in him
because of the word of the woman who testified,
“He told me everything I have done.”
When the Samaritans came to him,
they invited him to stay with them;
and he stayed there two days.
Many more began to believe in him because of his word,
and they said to the woman,
“We no longer believe because of your word;
for we have heard for ourselves,
and we know that this is truly the savior of the world.” ]
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 53 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (cf. John 4:42, 15)
THIRD SUNDAY OF LENT—A
R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
Only shorter form of Gospel given below. Lord, you are truly the Savior of the world;
give me living water, that I may never thirst again.—R.
FIRST READING (Ex 17:3-7) GOSPEL (Shorter form: Jn 4:5-15, 19b-26, 39a, 40-42)
A reading from the Book of Exodus: + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
IN those days, in their thirst for water, JESUS came to a town of Samaria called Sychar,
the people grumbled against Moses, near the plot of land that Jacob had given to his son Joseph.
saying, “Why did you ever make us leave Egypt? Jacob’s well was there.
Was it just to have us die here of thirst Jesus, tired from his journey, sat down there at the well.
with our children and our livestock?” It was about noon.
So Moses cried out to the LORD,
“What shall I do with this people? A woman of Samaria came to draw water.
a little more and they will stone me!” Jesus said to her,
The LORD answered Moses, “Give me a drink.”
“Go over there in front of the people, His disciples had gone into the town to buy food.
along with some of the elders of Israel, The Samaritan woman said to him,
holding in your hand, as you go, “How can you, a Jew, ask me, a Samaritan woman, for a drink?”
the staff with which you struck the river. —For Jews use nothing in common with Samaritans.—
I will be standing there in front of you on the rock in Horeb. Jesus answered and said to her,
Strike the rock, and the water will flow from it “If you knew the gift of God
for the people to drink.” and who is saying to you, ‘Give me a drink, ‘
This Moses did, in the presence of the elders of Israel. you would have asked him
The place was called Massah and Meribah, and he would have given you living water.”
because the Israelites quarreled there The woman said to him,
and tested the LORD, saying, “Sir, you do not even have a bucket and the cistern is deep;
“Is the LORD in our midst or not?” where then can you get this living water?
Are you greater than our father Jacob,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. who gave us this cistern and drank from it himself
with his children and his flocks?”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 95:1-2, 6-7, 8-9) Jesus answered and said to her,
“Everyone who drinks this water will be thirsty again;
R. (8) If today you hear his voice, harden not your hearts. but whoever drinks the water I shall give will never thirst;
the water I shall give will become in him
Come, let us sing joyfully to the LORD; a spring of water welling up to eternal life.”
let us acclaim the Rock of our salvation. The woman said to him,
Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving; “Sir, give me this water, so that I may not be thirsty
let us joyfully sing psalms to him.—R. or have to keep coming here to draw water.”
Come, let us bow down in worship; “Sir, I can see that you are a prophet.
let us kneel before the LORD who made us. Our ancestors worshiped on this mountain;
For he is our God, but you people say that the place to worship is in Jerusalem.”
and we are the people he shepherds, the flock he guides.—R. Jesus said to her,
“Believe me, woman, the hour is coming
Oh, that today you would hear his voice: when you will worship the Father
“Harden not your hearts as at Meribah, neither on this mountain nor in Jerusalem.
as in the day of Massah in the desert, You people worship what you do not understand;
Where your fathers tempted me; we worship what we understand,
they tested me though they had seen my works.”—R. because salvation is from the Jews.
But the hour is coming, and is now here,
SECOND READING (Rom 5:1-2, 5-8) when true worshipers will worship the Father in Spirit and truth;
and indeed the Father seeks such people to worship him.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: God is Spirit, and those who worship him
must worship in Spirit and truth.”
BROTHERS and sisters: The woman said to him,
Since we have been justified by faith, “I know that the Messiah is coming, the one called the Christ;
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ, when he comes, he will tell us everything.”
through whom we have gained access by faith Jesus said to her,
to this grace in which we stand, “I am he, the one speaking with you.”
and we boast in hope of the glory of God.
Many of the Samaritans of that town began to believe in him
And hope does not disappoint, because of the word of the woman who testified,
because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts “He told me everything I have done.”
through the Holy Spirit who has been given to us. When the Samaritans came to him,
For Christ, while we were still helpless, they invited him to stay with them;
died at the appointed time for the ungodly. and he stayed there two days.
Indeed, only with difficulty does one die for a just person, Many more began to believe in him because of his word,
though perhaps for a good person one might even find courage to die. and they said to the woman,
But God proves his love for us “We no longer believe because of your word;
in that while we were still sinners Christ died for us. for we have heard for ourselves,
and we know that this is truly the savior of the world.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 54 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS The fear of the LORD is pure,
THIRD SUNDAY OF LENT—B enduring forever;
the ordinances of the LORD are true,
all of them just.—R.
The readings given for Year A may be used in place of these.
They are more precious than gold,
than a heap of purest gold;
FIRST READING [Ex 20:1-17 or 20:1-3, 7-8, 12-17]
sweeter also than syrup
or honey from the comb.—R.
A reading from the Book of Exodus:
SECOND READING (1 Cor 1:22-25)
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
[ IN those days, God delivered all these commandments:
“I, the LORD, am your God,
BROTHERS and sisters:
who brought you out of the land of Egypt, that place of slavery.
Jews demand signs and Greeks look for wisdom,
You shall not have other gods besides me. ]
but we proclaim Christ crucified,
You shall not carve idols for yourselves
a stumbling block to Jews and foolishness to Gentiles,
in the shape of anything in the sky above
but to those who are called, Jews and Greeks alike,
or on the earth below or in the waters beneath the earth;
Christ the power of God and the wisdom of God.
you shall not bow down before them or worship them.
For the foolishness of God is wiser than human wisdom,
For I, the LORD, your God, am a jealous God,
and the weakness of God is stronger than human strength.
inflicting punishment for their fathers’ wickedness
on the children of those who hate me,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
down to the third and fourth generation;
but bestowing mercy down to the thousandth generation
VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (John 3:16)
on the children of those who love me and keep my commandments.
R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
[ “You shall not take the name of the LORD, your God, in vain.
For the LORD will not leave unpunished
God so loved the world that he gave his only Son,
the one who takes his name in vain.
so that everyone who believes in him might have eternal life.—R.
“Remember to keep holy the sabbath day. ]
GOSPEL (Jn 2:13-25)
Six days you may labor and do all your work,
but the seventh day is the sabbath of the LORD, your God.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
No work may be done then either by you, or your son or daughter,
or your male or female slave, or your beast,
SINCE the Passover of the Jews was near,
or by the alien who lives with you.
Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
In six days the Lord made the heavens and the earth,
He found in the temple area those who sold oxen, sheep, and doves,
the sea and all that is in them;
as well as the money changers seated there.
but on the seventh day he rested.
He made a whip out of cords
That is why the LORD has blessed the sabbath day and made it holy.
and drove them all out of the temple area, with the sheep and oxen,
and spilled the coins of the money changers
[ “Honor your father and your mother,
and overturned their tables,
that you may have a long life in the land
and to those who sold doves he said,
which the LORD, your God, is giving you.
“Take these out of here,
You shall not kill.
and stop making my Father’s house a marketplace.”
You shall not commit adultery.
His disciples recalled the words of Scripture,
You shall not steal.
Zeal for your house will consume me.
You shall not bear false witness against your neighbor.
At this the Jews answered and said to him,
You shall not covet your neighbor’s house.
“What sign can you show us for doing this?”
You shall not covet your neighbor’s wife,
Jesus answered and said to them,
nor his male or female slave, nor his ox or ass,
“Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up.”
nor anything else that belongs to him.” ]
The Jews said,
“This temple has been under construction for forty-six years,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and you will raise it up in three days?”
But he was speaking about the temple of his body.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 19:8, 9, 10, 11)
Therefore, when he was raised from the dead,
his disciples remembered that he had said this,
R. (John 6:68c) Lord, you have the words of everlasting life.
and they came to believe the Scripture
and the word Jesus had spoken.
The law of the LORD is perfect,
refreshing the soul;
While he was in Jerusalem for the feast of Passover,
The decree of the LORD is trustworthy,
many began to believe in his name
giving wisdom to the simple.—R.
when they saw the signs he was doing.
But Jesus would not trust himself to them because he knew them all,
The precepts of the LORD are right,
and did not need anyone to testify about human nature.
rejoicing the heart;
He himself understood it well.
the command of the LORD is clear,
enlightening the eye.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 55 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Merciful and gracious is the LORD,
slow to anger and abounding in kindness.
THIRD SUNDAY OF LENT—C
For as the heavens are high above the earth,
so surpassing is his kindness toward those who fear him.—R.
The readings given for Year A may be used in place of these.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 10:1-6, 10-12)
FIRST READING (Ex 3:1-8a, 13-15) A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
A reading from the Book of Exodus: I DO not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters,
that our ancestors were all under the cloud
MOSES was tending the flock of his father-in-law Jethro, and all passed through the sea,
the priest of Midian. and all of them were baptized into Moses
Leading the flock across the desert, he came to Horeb, in the cloud and in the sea.
the mountain of God. All ate the same spiritual food,
There an angel of the LORD appeared to Moses in fire and all drank the same spiritual drink,
flaming out of a bush. for they drank from a spiritual rock that followed them,
As he looked on, he was surprised to see that the bush, and the rock was the Christ.
though on fire, was not consumed. Yet God was not pleased with most of them,
So Moses decided, for they were struck down in the desert.
“I must go over to look at this remarkable sight,
and see why the bush is not burned.” These things happened as examples for us,
so that we might not desire evil things, as they did.
When the LORD saw him coming over to look at it more closely, Do not grumble as some of them did,
God called out to him from the bush, “Moses! Moses!” and suffered death by the destroyer.
He answered, “Here I am.” These things happened to them as an example,
God said, “Come no nearer! and they have been written down as a warning to us,
Remove the sandals from your feet, upon whom the end of the ages has come.
for the place where you stand is holy ground. Therefore, whoever thinks he is standing secure
I am the God of your fathers, ” he continued, should take care not to fall.
“the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob.”
Moses hid his face, for he was afraid to look at God. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
But the LORD said,
“I have witnessed the affliction of my people in Egypt VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Matthew 4:17)
and have heard their cry of complaint against their slave drivers,
so I know well what they are suffering. R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
Therefore I have come down to rescue them
from the hands of the Egyptians Repent, says the Lord;
and lead them out of that land into a good and spacious land, the kingdom of heaven is at hand.—R.
a land flowing with milk and honey.”
GOSPEL (Lk 13:1-9)
Moses said to God, “But when I go to the Israelites
and say to them, ‘The God of your fathers has sent me to you,’ + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
if they ask me, ‘What is his name?’ what am I to tell them?”
God replied, “I am who am.” SOME people told Jesus about the Galileans
Then he added, “This is what you shall tell the Israelites: whose blood Pilate had mingled with the blood of their sacrifices.
I AM sent me to you.” Jesus said to them in reply,
“Do you think that because these Galileans suffered in this way
God spoke further to Moses, “Thus shall you say to the Israelites: they were greater sinners than all other Galileans?
The LORD, the God of your fathers, By no means!
the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, the God of Jacob, But I tell you, if you do not repent,
has sent me to you. you will all perish as they did!
Or those eighteen people who were killed
“This is my name forever; when the tower at Siloam fell on them—
thus am I to be remembered through all generations.” do you think they were more guilty
than everyone else who lived in Jerusalem?
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. By no means!
But I tell you, if you do not repent,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 103: 1-2, 3-4, 6-7, 8, 11) you will all perish as they did!”
R. (8a) The Lord is kind and merciful. And he told them this parable:
“There once was a person who had a fig tree planted in his orchard,
Bless the LORD, O my soul; and when he came in search of fruit on it but found none,
and all my being, bless his holy name. he said to the gardener,
Bless the LORD, O my soul, ‘For three years now I have come in search of fruit on this fig tree
and forget not all his benefits.—R. but have found none.
So cut it down.
He pardons all your iniquities, Why should it exhaust the soil?’
heals all your ills, He said to him in reply,
He redeems your life from destruction, ‘Sir, leave it for this year also,
crowns you with kindness and compassion.—R. and I shall cultivate the ground around it and fertilize it;
it may bear fruit in the future.
The LORD secures justice If not you can cut it down.’”
and the rights of all the oppressed.
He has made known his ways to Moses, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and his deeds to the children of Israel.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 56 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Only goodness and kindness follow me
FOURTH SUNDAY OF LENT—A all the days of my life;
and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD
for years to come.—R.
FIRST READING (1 Sam 16:1b, 6-7, 10-13a)
SECOND READING (Eph 5:8-14)
A reading from the first Book of Samuel:
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
THE LORD said to Samuel:
“Fill your horn with oil, and be on your way. BROTHERS and sisters:
I am sending you to Jesse of Bethlehem, You were once darkness,
for I have chosen my king from among his sons.” but now you are light in the Lord.
Live as children of light,
As Jesse and his sons came to the sacrifice, for light produces every kind of goodness
Samuel looked at Eliab and thought, and righteousness and truth.
“Surely the Lord’s anointed is here before him.” Try to learn what is pleasing to the Lord.
But the LORD said to Samuel: Take no part in the fruitless works of darkness;
“Do not judge from his appearance or from his lofty stature, rather expose them, for it is shameful even to mention
because I have rejected him. the things done by them in secret;
Not as man sees does God see, but everything exposed by the light becomes visible,
because man sees the appearance for everything that becomes visible is light.
but the LORD looks into the heart.” Therefore, it says:
In the same way Jesse presented seven sons before Samuel, “Awake, O sleeper,
but Samuel said to Jesse, and arise from the dead,
“The LORD has not chosen any one of these.” and Christ will give you light.”
Then Samuel asked Jesse,
“Are these all the sons you have?” The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Jesse replied,
“There is still the youngest, who is tending the sheep.” VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (John 8:12)
Samuel said to Jesse,
“Send for him; R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
we will not begin the sacrificial banquet until he arrives here.”
Jesse sent and had the young man brought to them. I am the light of the world, says the Lord;
He was ruddy, a youth handsome to behold whoever follows me will have the light of life.—R.
and making a splendid appearance.
The LORD said, GOSPEL (Jn 9:1-41 or 9:1, 6-9, 13-17, 34-38)
“There—anoint him, for this is the one!”
Then Samuel, with the horn of oil in hand, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
anointed David in the presence of his brothers;
and from that day on, the spirit of the LORD rushed upon David. [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. [ AS Jesus passed by he saw a man blind from birth. ]
His disciples asked him,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 23: 1-3a, 3b-4, 5, 6) “Rabbi, who sinned, this man or his parents,
that he was born blind?”
R. (1) The Lord is my shepherd; there is nothing I shall want. Jesus answered,
“Neither he nor his parents sinned;
The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want. it is so that the works of God might be made visible through him.
In verdant pastures he gives me repose; We have to do the works of the one who sent me while it is day.
beside restful waters he leads me; Night is coming when no one can work.
he refreshes my soul.—R. While I am in the world, I am the light of the world.”
When he had said this, [ he spat on the ground
He guides me in right paths and made clay with the saliva,
for his name’s sake. and smeared the clay on his eyes,
Even though I walk in the dark valley and said to him,
I fear no evil; for you are at my side “Go wash in the Pool of Siloam”—which means Sent—.
With your rod and your staff So he went and washed, and came back able to see.
that give me courage.—R.
His neighbors and those who had seen him earlier as a beggar said,
You spread the table before me “Isn’t this the one who used to sit and beg?”
in the sight of my foes; Some said, “It is, ”
you anoint my head with oil; but others said, “No, he just looks like him.”
my cup overflows.—R. He said, “I am.” ]
So they said to him, “How were your eyes opened?”
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 57 ---
He replied, but if one is devout and does his will, he listens to him.
“The man called Jesus made clay and anointed my eyes It is unheard of that anyone ever opened the eyes of a person born blind.
and told me, ‘Go to Siloam and wash.’ If this man were not from God,
So I went there and washed and was able to see.” he would not be able to do anything.”
And they said to him, “Where is he?” [ They answered and said to him,
He said, “I don’t know.” “You were born totally in sin,
and are you trying to teach us?”
[ They brought the one who was once blind to the Pharisees. Then they threw him out.
Now Jesus had made clay and opened his eyes on a sabbath.
So then the Pharisees also asked him how he was able to see. When Jesus heard that they had thrown him out,
He said to them, he found him and said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”
“He put clay on my eyes, and I washed, and now I can see.” He answered and said,
So some of the Pharisees said, “Who is he, sir, that I may believe in him?”
“This man is not from God, Jesus said to him,
because he does not keep the sabbath.” “You have seen him,
But others said, the one speaking with you is he.”
“How can a sinful man do such signs?” He said,
And there was a division among them. “I do believe, Lord, ” and he worshiped him. ]
So they said to the blind man again, Then Jesus said,
“What do you have to say about him, “I came into this world for judgment,
since he opened your eyes?” so that those who do not see might see,
He said, “He is a prophet.” ] and those who do see might become blind.”
Now the Jews did not believe Some of the Pharisees who were with him heard this
that he had been blind and gained his sight and said to him, “Surely we are not also blind, are we?”
until they summoned the parents of the one who had gained his sight. Jesus said to them,
They asked them, “If you were blind, you would have no sin;
“Is this your son, who you say was born blind? but now you are saying, ‘We see, ‘so your sin remains.
How does he now see?”
His parents answered and said, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
“We know that this is our son and that he was born blind.
We do not know how he sees now,
nor do we know who opened his eyes.
Ask him, he is of age;
he can speak for himself.”
His parents said this because they were afraid
of the Jews, for the Jews had already agreed
that if anyone acknowledged him as the Christ,
he would be expelled from the synagogue.
For this reason his parents said,
“He is of age; question him.”
So a second time they called the man who had been blind
and said to him, “Give God the praise!
We know that this man is a sinner.”
He replied,
“If he is a sinner, I do not know.
One thing I do know is that I was blind and now I see.”
So they said to him,
“What did he do to you?
How did he open your eyes?”
He answered them,
“I told you already and you did not listen.
Why do you want to hear it again?
Do you want to become his disciples, too?”
They ridiculed him and said,
“You are that man’s disciple;
we are disciples of Moses!
We know that God spoke to Moses,
but we do not know where this one is from.”
The man answered and said to them,
“This is what is so amazing,
that you do not know where he is from, yet he opened my eyes.
We know that God does not listen to sinners,
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 58 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS BROTHERS and sisters:
You were once darkness,
FOURTH SUNDAY OF LENT—A
but now you are light in the Lord.
Live as children of light,
Only shorter form of Gospel given below.
for light produces every kind of goodness
and righteousness and truth.
Try to learn what is pleasing to the Lord.
FIRST READING (1 Sam 16:1b, 6-7, 10-13a) Take no part in the fruitless works of darkness;
rather expose them, for it is shameful even to mention
A reading from the first Book of Samuel: the things done by them in secret;
but everything exposed by the light becomes visible,
THE LORD said to Samuel: for everything that becomes visible is light.
“Fill your horn with oil, and be on your way. Therefore, it says:
I am sending you to Jesse of Bethlehem, “Awake, O sleeper,
for I have chosen my king from among his sons.” and arise from the dead,
and Christ will give you light.”
As Jesse and his sons came to the sacrifice,
Samuel looked at Eliab and thought, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
“Surely the Lord’s anointed is here before him.”
But the LORD said to Samuel: VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (John 8:12)
“Do not judge from his appearance or from his lofty stature,
because I have rejected him. R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
Not as man sees does God see,
because man sees the appearance I am the light of the world, says the Lord;
but the LORD looks into the heart.” whoever follows me will have the light of life.—R.
In the same way Jesse presented seven sons before Samuel,
but Samuel said to Jesse, GOSPEL (Shorter form: Jn 9:1, 6-9, 13-17, 34-38)
“The LORD has not chosen any one of these.”
Then Samuel asked Jesse, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
“Are these all the sons you have?”
Jesse replied, AS Jesus passed by he saw a man blind from birth.
“There is still the youngest, who is tending the sheep.” He spat on the ground
Samuel said to Jesse, and made clay with the saliva,
“Send for him; and smeared the clay on his eyes,
we will not begin the sacrificial banquet until he arrives here.” and said to him,
Jesse sent and had the young man brought to them. “Go wash in the Pool of Siloam”—which means Sent—.
He was ruddy, a youth handsome to behold So he went and washed, and came back able to see.
and making a splendid appearance.
The LORD said, His neighbors and those who had seen him earlier as a beggar said,
“There—anoint him, for this is the one!” “Isn’t this the one who used to sit and beg?”
Then Samuel, with the horn of oil in hand, Some said, “It is, ”
anointed David in the presence of his brothers; but others said, “No, he just looks like him.”
and from that day on, the spirit of the LORD rushed upon David. He said, “I am.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. They brought the one who was once blind to the Pharisees.
Now Jesus had made clay and opened his eyes on a sabbath.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 23: 1-3a, 3b-4, 5, 6) So then the Pharisees also asked him how he was able to see.
He said to them,
R. (1) The Lord is my shepherd; there is nothing I shall want. “He put clay on my eyes, and I washed, and now I can see.”
So some of the Pharisees said,
The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want. “This man is not from God,
In verdant pastures he gives me repose; because he does not keep the sabbath.”
beside restful waters he leads me; But others said,
he refreshes my soul.—R. “How can a sinful man do such signs?”
And there was a division among them.
He guides me in right paths So they said to the blind man again,
for his name’s sake. “What do you have to say about him,
Even though I walk in the dark valley since he opened your eyes?”
I fear no evil; for you are at my side He said, “He is a prophet.”
With your rod and your staff
that give me courage.—R. They answered and said to him,
“You were born totally in sin,
You spread the table before me and are you trying to teach us?”
in the sight of my foes; Then they threw him out.
you anoint my head with oil;
my cup overflows.—R. When Jesus heard that they had thrown him out,
he found him and said, “Do you believe in the Son of Man?”
Only goodness and kindness follow me He answered and said,
all the days of my life; “Who is he, sir, that I may believe in him?”
and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD Jesus said to him,
for years to come.—R. “You have seen him,
the one speaking with you is he.”
SECOND READING (Eph 5:8-14) He said,
“I do believe, Lord, ” and he worshiped him.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 59 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS in a foreign land?
FOURTH SUNDAY OF LENT—B If I forget you, Jerusalem,
may my right hand be forgotten!—R.
The readings given for Year A may be used in place of these.
May my tongue cleave to my palate
if I remember you not,
FIRST READING (2 Chr 36:14-16, 19-23) If I place not Jerusalem
ahead of my joy.—R.
A reading from the second Book of Chronicles:
SECOND READING (Eph 2:4-10)
IN those days, all the princes of Judah, the priests, and the people
added infidelity to infidelity, A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
practicing all the abominations of the nations
BROTHERS and sisters:
and polluting the LORD’S temple
God, who is rich in mercy,
which he had consecrated in Jerusalem.
because of the great love he had for us,
even when we were dead in our transgressions,
Early and often did the LORD, the God of their fathers,
brought us to life with Christ - by grace you have been saved -,
send his messengers to them,
raised us up with him,
for he had compassion on his people and his dwelling place.
and seated us with him in the heavens in Christ Jesus,
But they mocked the messengers of God,
that in the ages to come
despised his warnings, and scoffed at his prophets,
He might show the immeasurable riches of his grace
until the anger of the LORD against his people was so inflamed
in his kindness to us in Christ Jesus.
that there was no remedy.
For by grace you have been saved through faith,
Their enemies burnt the house of God,
and this is not from you; it is the gift of God;
tore down the walls of Jerusalem,
it is not from works, so no one may boast.
set all its palaces afire,
For we are his handiwork, created in Christ Jesus for the good works
and destroyed all its precious objects.
that God has prepared in advance,
Those who escaped the sword were carried captive to Babylon,
that we should live in them.
where they became servants of the king of the Chaldeans and his sons
until the kingdom of the Persians came to power.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
All this was to fulfill the word of the LORD spoken by Jeremiah:
“Until the land has retrieved its lost sabbaths,
VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (John 3:16)
during all the time it lies waste it shall have rest
while seventy years are fulfilled.”
R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
In the first year of Cyrus, king of Persia,
God so loved the world that he gave his only Son,
in order to fulfill the word of the LORD spoken by Jeremiah,
so everyone who believe in him might have eternal life.—R.
the LORD inspired King Cyrus of Persia
to issue this proclamation throughout his kingdom,
GOSPEL (Jn 3:14-21)
both by word of mouth and in writing:
“Thus says Cyrus, king of Persia:
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
All the kingdoms of the earth
the LORD, the God of heaven, has given to me,
JESUS said to Nicodemus:
and he has also charged me to build him a house
“Just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert,
in Jerusalem, which is in Judah.
so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
Whoever, therefore, among you belongs to any part of his people,
so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.”
let him go up, and may his God be with him!”
For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. so that everyone who believes in him might not perish
but might have eternal life.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 137:1-2, 3, 4-5, 6) For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world,
but that the world might be saved through him.
R. (6ab) Let my tongue be silenced, if I ever forget you! Whoever believes in him will not be condemned,
but whoever does not believe has already been condemned,
By the streams of Babylon because he has not believed in the name of the only Son of God.
we sat and wept And this is the verdict,
when we remembered Zion. that the light came into the world,
On the aspens of that land but people preferred darkness to light,
we hung up our harps.—R. because their works were evil.
For everyone who does wicked things hates the light
For there our captors asked of us and does not come toward the light,
the lyrics of our songs, so that his works might not be exposed.
And our despoilers urged us to be joyous: But whoever lives the truth comes to the light,
“Sing for us the songs of Zion!”—R. so that his works may be clearly seen as done in God.
How could we sing a song of the LORD The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 60 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS I will get up and go to my Father and shall say to him:
Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.—R.
FOURTH SUNDAY OF LENT—C
GOSPEL (Lk 15:1-3, 11-32)
The readings given for Year A may be used in place of these.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
FIRST READING (Jos 5:9a, 10-12) TAX collectors and sinners were all drawing near to listen to Jesus,
but the Pharisees and scribes began to complain, saying,
A reading from the Book of Joshua: “This man welcomes sinners and eats with them.”
So to them Jesus addressed this parable:
THE LORD said to Joshua, “A man had two sons, and the younger son said to his father,
“Today I have removed the reproach of Egypt from you.” ‘Father give me the share of your estate that should come to me.’
So the father divided the property between them.
While the Israelites were encamped at Gilgal on the plains of Jericho, After a few days, the younger son collected all his belongings
they celebrated the Passover and set off to a distant country
on the evening of the fourteenth of the month. where he squandered his inheritance on a life of dissipation.
On the day after the Passover, When he had freely spent everything,
they ate of the produce of the land a severe famine struck that country,
in the form of unleavened cakes and parched grain. and he found himself in dire need.
On that same day after the Passover, So he hired himself out to one of the local citizens
on which they ate of the produce of the land, the manna ceased. who sent him to his farm to tend the swine.
No longer was there manna for the Israelites, And he longed to eat his fill of the pods on which the swine fed,
who that year ate of the yield of the land of Canaan. but nobody gave him any.
Coming to his senses he thought,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. ‘How many of my father’s hired workers
have more than enough food to eat,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 34:2-3, 4-5, 6-7) but here am I, dying from hunger.
I shall get up and go to my father and I shall say to him,
R. (9a) Taste and see the goodness of the Lord. “Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
I no longer deserve to be called your son;
I will bless the LORD at all times; treat me as you would treat one of your hired workers.”’
his praise shall be ever in my mouth. So he got up and went back to his father.
Let my soul glory in the LORD; While he was still a long way off,
the lowly will hear me and be glad.—R. his father caught sight of him, and was filled with compassion.
He ran to his son, embraced him and kissed him.
Glorify the LORD with me, His son said to him,
let us together extol his name. ‘Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you;
I sought the LORD, and he answered me I no longer deserve to be called your son.’
and delivered me from all my fears.—R. But his father ordered his servants,
‘Quickly bring the finest robe and put it on him;
Look to him that you may be radiant with joy, put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet.
and your faces may not blush with shame. Take the fattened calf and slaughter it.
When the poor one called out, the LORD heard, Then let us celebrate with a feast,
and from all his distress he saved him. because this son of mine was dead, and has come to life again;
Taste and see the goodness of the Lord.—R. he was lost, and has been found.’
Then the celebration began.
SECOND READING (2 Cor 5:17-21) Now the older son had been out in the field
and, on his way back, as he neared the house,
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: he heard the sound of music and dancing.
He called one of the servants and asked what this might mean.
BROTHERS and sisters: The servant said to him,
Whoever is in Christ is a new creation: ‘Your brother has returned
the old things have passed away; and your father has slaughtered the fattened calf
behold, new things have come. because he has him back safe and sound.’
And all this is from God, He became angry,
who has reconciled us to himself through Christ and when he refused to enter the house,
and given us the ministry of reconciliation, his father came out and pleaded with him.
namely, God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ, He said to his father in reply,
not counting their trespasses against them ‘Look, all these years I served you
and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation. and not once did I disobey your orders;
So we are ambassadors for Christ, yet you never gave me even a young goat to feast on with my friends.
as if God were appealing through us. But when your son returns
We implore you on behalf of Christ, who swallowed up your property with prostitutes,
be reconciled to God. for him you slaughter the fattened calf.’
For our sake he made him to be sin who did not know sin, He said to him,
so that we might become the righteousness of God in him. ‘My son, you are here with me always;
everything I have is yours.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. But now we must celebrate and rejoice,
because your brother was dead and has come to life again;
VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Luke 15:18) he was lost and has been found.’”
R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ! The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 61 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (John 11:25a, 26)
FIFTH SUNDAY OF LENT—A
R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
FIRST READING (Ez 37:12-14) I am the resurrection and the life, says the Lord;
whoever believes in me, even if he dies, will live.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel:
GOSPEL (Jn 11:1-45 or 11:3-7, 17, 20-27, 33b-45)
THUS says the Lord GOD:
O my people, I will open your graves + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and have you rise from them,
and bring you back to the land of Israel. [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
Then you shall know that I am the LORD,
when I open your graves and have you rise from them, NOW a man was ill, Lazarus from Bethany,
O my people! the village of Mary and her sister Martha.
I will put my spirit in you that you may live, Mary was the one who had anointed the Lord with perfumed oil
and I will settle you upon your land; and dried his feet with her hair;
thus you shall know that I am the LORD. it was her brother Lazarus who was ill.
I have promised, and I will do it, says the LORD. So [ the sisters sent word to him [Jesus ] saying,
“Master, the one you love is ill.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. When Jesus heard this he said,
“This illness is not to end in death,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 130:1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8) but is for the glory of God,
that the Son of God may be glorified through it.”
R. (7) With the Lord there is mercy and fullness of redemption. Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
So when he heard that he was ill,
Out of the depths I cry to you, O LORD;
he remained for two days in the place where he was.
LORD, hear my voice!
Then after this he said to his disciples,
Let your ears be attentive
“Let us go back to Judea.” ]
to my voice in supplication.—R.
The disciples said to him,
“Rabbi, the Jews were just trying to stone you,
If you, O LORD, mark iniquities,
and you want to go back there?”
LORD, who can stand?
Jesus answered,
But with you is forgiveness,
“Are there not twelve hours in a day?
that you may be revered.—R.
If one walks during the day, he does not stumble,
because he sees the light of this world.
I trust in the LORD;
But if one walks at night, he stumbles,
my soul trusts in his word.
because the light is not in him.”
More than sentinels wait for the dawn,
He said this, and then told them,
let Israel wait for the LORD.—R.
“Our friend Lazarus is asleep,
but I am going to awaken him.”
For with the LORD is kindness
and with him is plenteous redemption; So the disciples said to him,
And he will redeem Israel “Master, if he is asleep, he will be saved.”
from all their iniquities.—R. But Jesus was talking about his death,
while they thought that he meant ordinary sleep.
SECOND READING (Rom 8:8-11) So then Jesus said to them clearly,
“Lazarus has died.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: And I am glad for you that I was not there,
that you may believe.
BROTHERS and sisters: Let us go to him.”
Those who are in the flesh cannot please God. So Thomas, called Didymus, said to his fellow disciples,
But you are not in the flesh; “Let us also go to die with him.”
on the contrary, you are in the spirit,
if only the Spirit of God dwells in you. [ When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus
Whoever does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him. had already been in the tomb for four days.
But if Christ is in you, Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, only about two miles away.
although the body is dead because of sin, And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary
the spirit is alive because of righteousness. to comfort them about their brother.
If the Spirit of the one who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, When Martha heard that Jesus was coming,
the one who raised Christ from the dead she went to meet him;
will give life to your mortal bodies also, but Mary sat at home.
through his Spirit dwelling in you. Martha said to Jesus,
“Lord, if you had been here,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. my brother would not have died.
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 62 ---
But even now I know that whatever you ask of God, Now many of the Jews who had come to Mary
God will give you.” and seen what he had done began to believe in him. ]
Jesus said to her,
“Your brother will rise.” The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Martha said to him,
“I know he will rise,
in the resurrection on the last day.”
Jesus told her,
“I am the resurrection and the life;
whoever believes in me, even if he dies, will live,
and everyone who lives and believes in me will never die.
Do you believe this?”
She said to him, “Yes, Lord.
I have come to believe that you are the CHRIST, the Son of God,
the one who is coming into the world.” ]
When she had said this,
she went and called her sister Mary secretly, saying,
“The teacher is here and is asking for you.”
As soon as she heard this,
she rose quickly and went to him.
For Jesus had not yet come into the village,
but was still where Martha had met him.
So when the Jews who were with her in the house comforting her
saw Mary get up quickly and go out,
they followed her,
presuming that she was going to the tomb to weep there.
When Mary came to where Jesus was and saw him,
she fell at his feet and said to him,
“Lord, if you had been here,
my brother would not have died.”
When Jesus saw her weeping and the Jews who had come with her
weeping,
he became perturbed and deeply troubled, and said,
“Where have you laid him?”
They said to him, “Sir, come and see.”
And Jesus wept.
So the Jews said, “See how he loved him.”
But some of them said,
“Could not the one who opened the eyes of the blind man
have done something so that this man would not have died?”
[ So Jesus, perturbed again, came to the tomb.
It was a cave, and a stone lay across it.
Jesus said, “Take away the stone.”
Martha, the dead man’s sister, said to him,
“Lord, by now there will be a stench;
he has been dead for four days.”
Jesus said to her,
“Did I not tell you that if you believe
you will see the glory of God?”
So they took away the stone.
And Jesus raised his eyes and said,
“Father, I thank you for hearing me.
I know that you always hear me;
but because of the crowd here I have said this,
that they may believe that you sent me.”
And when he had said this,
He cried out in a loud voice,
“Lazarus, come out!”
The dead man came out,
tied hand and foot with burial bands,
and his face was wrapped in a cloth.
So Jesus said to them,
“Untie him and let him go.”
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 63 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS whoever believes in me, even if he dies, will live.—R.
FIFTH SUNDAY OF LENT—A
GOSPEL (Jn 11:1-45 or 11:3-7, 17, 20-27, 33b-45)
Only shorter form of Gospel given below.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
THE sisters sent word to him [Jesus ] saying,
FIRST READING (Ez 37:12-14) “Master, the one you love is ill.”
when Jesus heard this he said,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel: “This illness is not to end in death,
but is for the glory of God,
THUS says the Lord GOD: that the Son of God may be glorified through it.”
O my people, I will open your graves Now Jesus loved Martha and her sister and Lazarus.
and have you rise from them, So when he heard that he was ill,
and bring you back to the land of Israel. he remained for two days in the place where he was.
Then you shall know that I am the LORD, Then after this he said to his disciples,
when I open your graves and have you rise from them, “Let us go back to Judea.”
O my people!
I will put my spirit in you that you may live, When Jesus arrived, he found that Lazarus
and I will settle you upon your land; had already been in the tomb for four days.
thus you shall know that I am the LORD. Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, only about two miles away.
I have promised, and I will do it, says the LORD. And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary
to comfort them about their brother.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. When Martha heard that Jesus was coming,
she went to meet him;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 130:1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8) but Mary sat at home.
Martha said to Jesus,
R. (7) With the Lord there is mercy and fullness of redemption. “Lord, if you had been here,
my brother would not have died.
Out of the depths I cry to you, O LORD; But even now I know that whatever you ask of God,
LORD, hear my voice! God will give you.”
Let your ears be attentive Jesus said to her,
to my voice in supplication.—R. “Your brother will rise.”
Martha said to him,
If you, O LORD, mark iniquities, “I know he will rise,
LORD, who can stand? in the resurrection on the last day.”
But with you is forgiveness, Jesus told her,
that you may be revered.—R. “I am the resurrection and the life;
whoever believes in me, even if he dies, will live,
I trust in the LORD; and everyone who lives and believes in me will never die.
my soul trusts in his word. Do you believe this?”
More than sentinels wait for the dawn, She said to him, “Yes, Lord.
let Israel wait for the LORD.—R. I have come to believe that you are the CHRIST, the Son of God,
the one who is coming into the world.”
For with the LORD is kindness
and with him is plenteous redemption; So Jesus, perturbed again, came to the tomb.
And he will redeem Israel It was a cave, and a stone lay across it.
from all their iniquities.—R. Jesus said, “Take away the stone.”
Martha, the dead man’s sister, said to him,
SECOND READING (Rom 8:8-11) “Lord, by now there will be a stench;
he has been dead for four days.”
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: Jesus said to her,
“Did I not tell you that if you believe
BROTHERS and sisters: you will see the glory of God?”
Those who are in the flesh cannot please God. So they took away the stone.
But you are not in the flesh; And Jesus raised his eyes and said,
on the contrary, you are in the spirit, “Father, I thank you for hearing me.
if only the Spirit of God dwells in you. I know that you always hear me;
Whoever does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him. but because of the crowd here I have said this,
But if Christ is in you, that they may believe that you sent me.”
although the body is dead because of sin, And when he had said this,
the spirit is alive because of righteousness. He cried out in a loud voice,
If the Spirit of the one who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, “Lazarus, come out!”
the one who raised Christ from the dead The dead man came out,
will give life to your mortal bodies also, tied hand and foot with burial bands,
through his Spirit dwelling in you. and his face was wrapped in a cloth.
So Jesus said to them,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. “Untie him and let him go.”
VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (John 11:25a, 26) Now many of the Jews who had come to Mary
and seen what he had done began to believe in him.
R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
I am the resurrection and the life, says the Lord;
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 64 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Whoever serves me must follow me, says the Lord;
FIFTH SUNDAY OF LENT—B and where I am, there also will my servant be.—R.
The readings given for Year A may be used in place of these. GOSPEL (Jn 12:20-33)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
FIRST READING (Jer 31:31-34)
SOME Greeks who had come to worship at the Passover Feast
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah: came to Philip, who was from Bethsaida in Galilee,
and asked him, “Sir, we would like to see Jesus.”
THE days are coming, says the LORD, Philip went and told Andrew;
when I will make a new covenant with the house of Israel then Andrew and Philip went and told Jesus.
and the house of Judah. Jesus answered them,
It will not be like the covenant I made with their fathers “The hour has come for the Son of Man to be glorified.
the day I took them by the hand Amen, amen, I say to you,
to lead them forth from the land of Egypt; unless a grain of wheat falls to the ground and dies,
for they broke my covenant, it remains just a grain of wheat;
and I had to show myself their master, says the LORD. but if it dies, it produces much fruit.
But this is the covenant that I will make Whoever loves his life loses it,
with the house of Israel after those days, says the LORD. and whoever hates his life in this world
I will place my law within them and write it upon their hearts; will preserve it for eternal life.
I will be their God, and they shall be my people. Whoever serves me must follow me,
No longer will they have need to teach their friends and relatives and where I am, there also will my servant be.
how to know the LORD. The Father will honor whoever serves me.
All, from least to greatest, shall know me, says the LORD,
for I will forgive their evildoing and remember their sin no more. “I am troubled now. Yet what should I say?
‘Father, save me from this hour’?
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. But it was for this purpose that I came to this hour.
Father, glorify your name.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 51:3-4, 12-13, 14-15) Then a voice came from heaven,
“I have glorified it and will glorify it again.”
R. (12a) Create a clean heart in me, O God. The crowd there heard it and said it was thunder;
but others said, “An angel has spoken to him.”
Have mercy on me, O God, in your goodness; Jesus answered and said,
in the greatness of your compassion wipe out my offense. “This voice did not come for my sake but for yours.
Thoroughly wash me from my guilt Now is the time of judgment on this world;
and of my sin cleanse me.—R. now the ruler of this world will be driven out.
And when I am lifted up from the earth,
A clean heart create for me, O God, I will draw everyone to myself.”
and a steadfast spirit renew within me. He said this indicating the kind of death he would die.
Cast me not out from your presence,
and your Holy spirit take not from me.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Give me back the joy of your salvation,
and a willing spirit sustain in me.
I will teach transgressors your ways,
and sinners shall return to you.—R.
SECOND READING (Heb 5:7-9)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
IN the days when Christ Jesus was in the flesh,
he offered prayers and supplications with loud cries and tears
to the one who was able to save him from death,
and he was heard because of his reverence.
Son though he was, he learned obedience from what he suffered;
and when he was made perfect,
he became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (John 12:26)
R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 65 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS that I may gain Christ and be found in him,
FIFTH SUNDAY OF LENT—C not having any righteousness of my own based on the law
but that which comes through faith in Christ,
The readings given for Year A may be used in place of these. the righteousness from God,
depending on faith to know him and the power of his resurrection
and the sharing of his sufferings by being conformed to his death,
FIRST READING (Is 43:16-21) if somehow I may attain the resurrection from the dead.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: It is not that I have already taken hold of it
or have already attained perfect maturity,
THUS says the LORD, but I continue my pursuit in hope that I may possess it,
who opens a way in the sea since I have indeed been taken possession of by Christ Jesus.
and a path in the mighty waters, Brothers and sisters, I for my part
who leads out chariots and horsemen, do not consider myself to have taken possession.
a powerful army, Just one thing: forgetting what lies behind
till they lie prostrate together, never to rise, but straining forward to what lies ahead,
snuffed out and quenched like a wick. I continue my pursuit toward the goal,
Remember not the events of the past, the prize of God’s upward calling, in Christ Jesus.
the things of long ago consider not;
see, I am doing something new! The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Now it springs forth, do you not perceive it?
In the desert I make a way, VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Joel 2:12-13)
in the wasteland, rivers.
Wild beasts honor me, R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
jackals and ostriches,
for I put water in the desert Even now, says the Lord,
and rivers in the wasteland return to me with your whole heart;
for my chosen people to drink, for I am gracious and merciful.—R.
the people whom I formed for myself,
that they might announce my praise. GOSPEL (Jn 8:1-11)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 126:1-2, 2-3, 4-5, 6) JESUS went to the Mount of Olives.
But early in the morning he arrived again in the temple area,
R. (3) The Lord has done great things for us; we are filled with joy. and all the people started coming to him,
and he sat down and taught them.
When the LORD brought back the captives of Zion, Then the scribes and the Pharisees brought a woman
we were like men dreaming. who had been caught in adultery
Then our mouth was filled with laughter, and made her stand in the middle.
and our tongue with rejoicing.—R. They said to him,
“Teacher, this woman was caught
Then they said among the nations, in the very act of committing adultery.
“The LORD has done great things for them.” Now in the law, Moses commanded us to stone such women.
The LORD has done great things for us; So what do you say?”
we are glad indeed.—R. They said this to test him,
so that they could have some charge to bring against him.
Restore our fortunes, O LORD, Jesus bent down and began to write on the ground with his finger.
like the torrents in the southern desert. But when they continued asking him,
Those that sow in tears he straightened up and said to them,
shall reap rejoicing.—R. “Let the one among you who is without sin
be the first to throw a stone at her.”
Although they go forth weeping, Again he bent down and wrote on the ground.
carrying the seed to be sown, And in response, they went away one by one,
They shall come back rejoicing, beginning with the elders.
carrying their sheaves.—R. So he was left alone with the woman before him.
Then Jesus straightened up and said to her,
SECOND READING (Phil 3:8-14) “Woman, where are they?
Has no one condemned you?”
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians: She replied, “No one, sir.”
Then Jesus said, “Neither do I condemn you.
BROTHERS and sisters: Go, and from now on do not sin any more.”
I consider everything as a loss
because of the supreme good of knowing Christ Jesus my Lord. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
For his sake I have accepted the loss of all things
and I consider them so much rubbish,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 66 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS he humbled himself,
PALM SUNDAY—A becoming obedient to the point of death,
even death on a cross.
Because of this, God greatly exalted him
FIRST READING (Is 50:4-7) and bestowed on him the name
which is above every name,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bend,
THE Lord GOD has given me of those in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
a well-trained tongue, and every tongue confess that
that I might know how to speak to the weary Jesus Christ is Lord,
a word that will rouse them. to the glory of God the Father.
Morning after morning
he opens my ear that I may hear; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and I have not rebelled,
have not turned back. VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Phil 2:8-9)
I gave my back to those who beat me,
my cheeks to those who plucked my beard; R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
my face I did not shield
from buffets and spitting. Christ became obedient to the point of death,
even death on a cross.
The Lord GOD is my help, Because of this, God greatly exalted him
therefore I am not disgraced; and bestowed on him the name which is above every name.—R.
I have set my face like flint,
knowing that I shall not be put to shame. GOSPEL (Mt 26:14-27:66 or 27:11-54)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ according to Matthew:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 22:8-9, 17-18, 19-20, 23-24) ONE of the Twelve, who was called Judas Iscariot,
went to the chief priests and said,
R. (2a) My God, my God, why have you abandoned me? "What are you willing to give me
if I hand him over to you?"
All who see me scoff at me; They paid him thirty pieces of silver,
they mock me with parted lips, they wag their heads: and from that time on he looked for an opportunity
He relied on the LORD; let him deliver him, to hand him over.
let him rescue him, if he loves him.—R.
On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread,
Indeed, many dogs surround me, the disciples approached Jesus and said,
a pack of evildoers closes in upon me; "Where do you want us to prepare
They have pierced my hands and my feet; for you to eat the Passover?"
I can count all my bones.—R. He said,
"Go into the city to a certain man and tell him,
They divide my garments among them, The teacher says, My appointed time draws near;
and for my vesture they cast lots. in your house I shall celebrate the Passover with my disciples."
But you, O LORD, be not far from me; The disciples then did as Jesus had ordered,
O my help, hasten to aid me.—R. and prepared the Passover.
I will proclaim your name to my brethren; When it was evening,
in the midst of the assembly I will praise you: he reclined at table with the Twelve.
You who fear the LORD, praise him; And while they were eating, he said,
all you descendants of Jacob, give glory to him; "Amen, I say to you, one of you will betray me."
revere him, all you descendants of Israel!—R. Deeply distressed at this,
they began to say to him one after another,
SECOND READING (Phil 2:6-11) "Surely it is not I, Lord?"
He said in reply,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians: "He who has dipped his hand into the dish with me
is the one who will betray me.
CHRIST Jesus, though he was in the form of God, The Son of Man indeed goes, as it is written of him,
did not regard equality with God but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed.
something to be grasped. It would be better for that man if he had never been born."
Rather, he emptied himself, Then Judas, his betrayer, said in reply,
taking the form of a slave, "Surely it is not I, Rabbi?"
coming in human likeness; He answered, "You have said so."
and found human in appearance,
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 67 ---
While they were eating, While he was still speaking,
Jesus took bread, said the blessing, Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived,
broke it, and giving it to his disciples said, accompanied by a large crowd, with swords and clubs,
"Take and eat; this is my body." who had come from the chief priests and the elders
Then he took a cup, gave thanks, and gave it to them, saying, of the people.
"Drink from it, all of you, His betrayer had arranged a sign with them, saying,
for this is my blood of the covenant, "The man I shall kiss is the one; arrest him."
which will be shed on behalf of many Immediately he went over to Jesus and said,
for the forgiveness of sins. "Hail, Rabbi!" and he kissed him.
I tell you, from now on I shall not drink this fruit of the vine Jesus answered him,
until the day when I drink it with you new "Friend, do what you have come for."
in the kingdom of my Father." Then stepping forward they laid hands on Jesus and arrested him.
Then, after singing a hymn, And behold, one of those who accompanied Jesus
they went out to the Mount of Olives. put his hand to his sword, drew it,
and struck the high priests servant, cutting off his ear.
Then Jesus said to them, Then Jesus said to him,
"This night all of you will have your faith in me shaken, "Put your sword back into its sheath,
for it is written: for all who take the sword will perish by the sword.
I will strike the shepherd, Do you think that I cannot call upon my Father
and the sheep of the flock will be dispersed; and he will not provide me at this moment
but after I have been raised up, with more than twelve legions of angels?
I shall go before you to Galilee." But then how would the Scriptures be fulfilled
Peter said to him in reply, which say that it must come to pass in this way?"
"Though all may have their faith in you shaken, At that hour Jesus said to the crowds,
mine will never be." "Have you come out as against a robber,
Jesus said to him, with swords and clubs to seize me?
"Amen, I say to you, Day after day I sat teaching in the temple area,
this very night before the cock crows, yet you did not arrest me.
you will deny me three times." But all this has come to pass
Peter said to him, that the writings of the prophets may be fulfilled."
"Even though I should have to die with you, Then all the disciples left him and fled.
I will not deny you."
And all the disciples spoke likewise. Those who had arrested Jesus led him away
to Caiaphas the high priest,
Then Jesus came with them to a place called Gethsemane, where the scribes and the elders were assembled.
and he said to his disciples, Peter was following him at a distance
"Sit here while I go over there and pray." as far as the high priests courtyard,
He took along Peter and the two sons of Zebedee, and going inside he sat down with the servants
and began to feel sorrow and distress. to see the outcome.
Then he said to them, The chief priests and the entire Sanhedrin
"My soul is sorrowful even to death. kept trying to obtain false testimony against Jesus
Remain here and keep watch with me." in order to put him to death,
He advanced a little and fell prostrate in prayer, saying, but they found none,
"My Father, if it is possible, though many false witnesses came forward.
let this cup pass from me; Finally two came forward who stated,
yet, not as I will, but as you will." "This man said, I can destroy the temple of God
When he returned to his disciples he found them asleep. and within three days rebuild it."
He said to Peter, The high priest rose and addressed him,
"So you could not keep watch with me for one hour? "Have you no answer?
Watch and pray that you may not undergo the test. What are these men testifying against you?"
The spirit is willing, but the flesh is weak." But Jesus was silent.
Withdrawing a second time, he prayed again, Then the high priest said to him,
"My Father, if it is not possible that this cup pass "I order you to tell us under oath before the living God
without my drinking it, your will be done!" whether you are the Christ, the Son of God."
Then he returned once more and found them asleep, Jesus said to him in reply,
for they could not keep their eyes open. "You have said so.
He left them and withdrew again and prayed a third time, But I tell you:
saying the same thing again. From now on you will see the Son of Man
Then he returned to his disciples and said to them, seated at the right hand of the Power
"Are you still sleeping and taking your rest? and coming on the clouds of heaven."
Behold, the hour is at hand Then the high priest tore his robes and said,
when the Son of Man is to be handed over to sinners. "He has blasphemed!
Get up, let us go. What further need have we of witnesses?
Look, my betrayer is at hand." You have now heard the blasphemy;
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 68 ---
what is your opinion?" against you?"
They said in reply, But he did not answer him one word,
"He deserves to die!" so that the governor was greatly amazed.
Then they spat in his face and struck him,
while some slapped him, saying, Now on the occasion of the feast
"Prophesy for us, Christ: who is it that struck you?" the governor was accustomed to release to the crowd
one prisoner whom they wished.
Now Peter was sitting outside in the courtyard. And at that time they had a notorious prisoner called Barabbas.
One of the maids came over to him and said, So when they had assembled, Pilate said to them,
"You too were with Jesus the Galilean." "Which one do you want me to release to you,
But he denied it in front of everyone, saying, Barabbas, or Jesus called Christ?"
"I do not know what you are talking about!" For he knew that it was out of envy
As he went out to the gate, another girl saw him that they had handed him over.
and said to those who were there, While he was still seated on the bench,
"This man was with Jesus the Nazarene." his wife sent him a message,
Again he denied it with an oath, "Have nothing to do with that righteous man.
"I do not know the man!" I suffered much in a dream today because of him."
A little later the bystanders came over and said to Peter, The chief priests and the elders persuaded the crowds
"Surely you too are one of them; to ask for Barabbas but to destroy Jesus.
even your speech gives you away." The governor said to them in reply,
At that he began to curse and to swear, "Which of the two do you want me to release to you?"
"I do not know the man." They answered, "Barabbas!"
And immediately a cock crowed. Pilate said to them,
Then Peter remembered the word that Jesus had spoken: "Then what shall I do with Jesus called Christ?"
Before the cock crows you will deny me three times. They all said,
He went out and began to weep bitterly. "Let him be crucified!"
But he said,
When it was morning, "Why? What evil has he done?"
all the chief priests and the elders of the people They only shouted the louder,
took counsel against Jesus to put him to death. "Let him be crucified!"
They bound him, led him away, When Pilate saw that he was not succeeding at all,
and handed him over to Pilate, the governor. but that a riot was breaking out instead,
he took water and washed his hands in the sight of the crowd,
Then Judas, his betrayer, seeing that Jesus had been condemned, saying, "I am innocent of this mans blood.
deeply regretted what he had done. Look to it yourselves."
He returned the thirty pieces of silver And the whole people said in reply,
to the chief priests and elders, saying, "His blood be upon us and upon our children."
"I have sinned in betraying innocent blood." Then he released Barabbas to them,
They said, but after he had Jesus scourged,
"What is that to us? he handed him over to be crucified.
Look to it yourself."
Flinging the money into the temple, Then the soldiers of the governor took Jesus inside the praetorium
he departed and went off and hanged himself. and gathered the whole cohort around him.
The chief priests gathered up the money, but said, They stripped off his clothes
"It is not lawful to deposit this in the temple treasury, and threw a scarlet military cloak about him.
for it is the price of blood." Weaving a crown out of thorns, they placed it on his head,
After consultation, they used it to buy the potters field and a reed in his right hand.
as a burial place for foreigners. And kneeling before him, they mocked him, saying,
That is why that field even today is called the Field of Blood. "Hail, King of the Jews!"
Then was fulfilled what had been said through Jeremiah They spat upon him and took the reed
the prophet, and kept striking him on the head.
And they took the thirty pieces of silver, And when they had mocked him,
the value of a man with a price on his head, they stripped him of the cloak,
a price set by some of the Israelites, dressed him in his own clothes,
and they paid it out for the potters field and led him off to crucify him.
just as the Lord had commanded me.
As they were going out, they met a Cyrenian named Simon;
[ Now Jesus stood before the governor, and he questioned him, this man they pressed into service
"Are you the king of the Jews?" to carry his cross.
Jesus said, "You say so."
And when he was accused by the chief priests and elders, And when they came to a place called Golgotha
he made no answer. —which means Place of the Skull—,
Then Pilate said to him, they gave Jesus wine to drink mixed with gall.
"Do you not hear how many things they are testifying But when he had tasted it, he refused to drink.
-3-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 69 ---
After they had crucified him, Taking the body, Joseph wrapped it in clean linen
they divided his garments by casting lots; and laid it in his new tomb that he had hewn in the rock.
then they sat down and kept watch over him there. Then he rolled a huge stone across the entrance to the tomb
And they placed over his head the written charge against him: and departed.
"This is Jesus, the King of the Jews." But Mary Magdalene and the other Mary
Two revolutionaries were crucified with him, remained sitting there, facing the tomb.
one on his right and the other on his left. The next day, the one following the day of preparation,
Those passing by reviled him, shaking their heads and saying, the chief priests and the Pharisees
"You who would destroy the temple and rebuild it in gathered before Pilate and said,
three days, "Sir, we remember that this impostor while still alive said,
save yourself, if you are the Son of God, After three days I will be raised up.
and come down from the cross!" Give orders, then, that the grave be secured until the third day,
Likewise the chief priests with the scribes and elders lest his disciples come and steal him and say to the people,
mocked him and said, He has been raised from the dead.
"He saved others; he cannot save himself. This last imposture would be worse than the first."
So he is the king of Israel! Pilate said to them,
Let him come down from the cross now, "The guard is yours;
and we will believe in him. go, secure it as best you can."
He trusted in God; So they went and secured the tomb
let him deliver him now if he wants him. by fixing a seal to the stone and setting the guard.
For he said, I am the Son of God."
The revolutionaries who were crucified with him The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
also kept abusing him in the same way.
From noon onward, darkness came over the whole land
until three in the afternoon.
And about three oclock Jesus cried out in a loud voice,
"Eli, Eli, lema sabachthani?"
which means, "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"
Some of the bystanders who heard it said,
"This one is calling for Elijah."
Immediately one of them ran to get a sponge;
he soaked it in wine, and putting it on a reed,
gave it to him to drink.
But the rest said,
"Wait, let us see if Elijah comes to save him"
But Jesus cried out again in a loud voice,
and gave up his spirit.
[ Here all kneel and pause for a short time. ]
And behold, the veil of the sanctuary
was torn in two from top to bottom.
The earth quaked, rocks were split, tombs were opened,
and the bodies of many saints who had fallen asleep
were raised.
And coming forth from their tombs after his resurrection,
they entered the holy city and appeared to many.
The centurion and the men with him who were keeping watch
over Jesus
feared greatly when they saw the earthquake
and all that was happening, and they said,
"Truly, this was the Son of God!" ]
There were many women there, looking on from a distance,
who had followed Jesus from Galilee, ministering to him.
Among them were Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of James
and Joseph,
and the mother of the sons of Zebedee.
When it was evening,
there came a rich man from Arimathea named Joseph,
who was himself a disciple of Jesus.
He went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus;
then Pilate ordered it to be handed over.
-4-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 70 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS he humbled himself,
PALM SUNDAY—B becoming obedient to the point of death,
even death on a cross.
Because of this, God greatly exalted him
FIRST READING (Is 50:4-7) and bestowed on him the name
which is above every name,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bend,
THE Lord GOD has given me of those in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
a well-trained tongue, and every tongue confess that
that I might know how to speak to the weary Jesus Christ is Lord,
a word that will rouse them. to the glory of God the Father.
Morning after morning
he opens my ear that I may hear; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and I have not rebelled,
have not turned back. VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Phil 2:8-9)
I gave my back to those who beat me,
my cheeks to those who plucked my beard; R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
my face I did not shield
from buffets and spitting. Christ became obedient to the point of death,
even death on a cross.
The Lord GOD is my help, Because of this, God greatly exalted him
therefore I am not disgraced; and bestowed on him the name which is above every name.—R.
I have set my face like flint,
knowing that I shall not be put to shame. GOSPEL (Mk 14:1-15:47 or 15:1-39)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ according to Mark:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 22:8-9, 17-18, 19-20, 23-24) THE Passover and the Feast of Unleavened Bread
were to take place in two days time.
R. (2a) My God, my God, why have you abandoned me? So the chief priests and the scribes were seeking a way
to arrest him by treachery and put him to death.
All who see me scoff at me; They said, "Not during the festival,
they mock me with parted lips, they wag their heads: for fear that there may be a riot among the people."
He relied on the LORD; let him deliver him,
let him rescue him, if he loves him.—R. When he was in Bethany reclining at table
in the house of Simon the leper,
Indeed, many dogs surround me, a woman came with an alabaster jar of perfumed oil,
a pack of evildoers closes in upon me; costly genuine spikenard.
They have pierced my hands and my feet; She broke the alabaster jar and poured it on his head.
I can count all my bones.—R. There were some who were indignant.
"Why has there been this waste of perfumed oil?
They divide my garments among them, It could have been sold for more than three hundred days wages
and for my vesture they cast lots. and the money given to the poor."
But you, O LORD, be not far from me; They were infuriated with her.
O my help, hasten to aid me.—R. Jesus said, "Let her alone.
Why do you make trouble for her?
I will proclaim your name to my brethren; She has done a good thing for me.
in the midst of the assembly I will praise you: The poor you will always have with you,
You who fear the LORD, praise him; and whenever you wish you can do good to them,
all you descendants of Jacob, give glory to him; but you will not always have me.
revere him, all you descendants of Israel!—R. She has done what she could.
She has anticipated anointing my body for burial.
SECOND READING (Phil 2:6-11) Amen, I say to you,
wherever the gospel is proclaimed to the whole world,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians: what she has done will be told in memory of her."
CHRIST Jesus, though he was in the form of God, Then Judas Iscariot, one of the Twelve,
did not regard equality with God went off to the chief priests to hand him over to them.
something to be grasped. When they heard him they were pleased and promised to pay him money.
Rather, he emptied himself, Then he looked for an opportunity to hand him over.
taking the form of a slave,
coming in human likeness; On the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread,
and found human in appearance, when they sacrificed the Passover lamb,
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 71 ---
his disciples said to him, He took with him Peter, James, and John,
"Where do you want us to go and began to be troubled and distressed.
and prepare for you to eat the Passover?" Then he said to them,"My soul is sorrowful even to death.
He sent two of his disciples and said to them, Remain here and keep watch."
"Go into the city and a man will meet you, He advanced a little and fell to the ground and prayed
carrying a jar of water. that if it were possible the hour might pass by him;
Follow him. he said, "Abba, Father, all things are possible to you.
Wherever he enters, say to the master of the house, Take this cup away from me,
'The Teacher says, Where is my guest room but not what I will but what you will."
where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?' When he returned he found them asleep.
Then he will show you a large upper room furnished and ready. He said to Peter, "Simon, are you asleep?
Make the preparations for us there." Could you not keep watch for one hour?
The disciples then went off, entered the city, Watch and pray that you may not undergo the test.
and found it just as he had told them; The spirit is willing but the flesh is weak."
and they prepared the Passover. Withdrawing again, he prayed, saying the same thing.
Then he returned once more and found them asleep,
When it was evening, he came with the Twelve. for they could not keep their eyes open
And as they reclined at table and were eating, Jesus said, and did not know what to answer him.
"Amen, I say to you, one of you will betray me, He returned a third time and said to them,
one who is eating with me." "Are you still sleeping and taking your rest?
They began to be distressed and to say to him, one by one, It is enough. The hour has come.
"Surely it is not I?" Behold, the Son of Man is to be handed over to sinners.
He said to them, Get up, let us go.
"One of the Twelve, the one who dips with me into See, my betrayer is at hand."
the dish.
For the Son of Man indeed goes, as it is written of him, Then, while he was still speaking,
but woe to that man by whom the Son of Man is betrayed. Judas, one of the Twelve, arrived,
It would be better for that man if he had never been born." accompanied by a crowd with swords and clubs
who had come from the chief priests,
While they were eating, the scribes, and the elders.
he took bread, said the blessing, His betrayer had arranged a signal with them, saying,
broke it, and gave it to them, and said, "The man I shall kiss is the one;
"Take it; this is my body." arrest him and lead him away securely."
Then he took a cup, gave thanks, and gave it to them, He came and immediately went over to him and said,
and they all drank from it. "Rabbi." And he kissed him.
He said to them, At this they laid hands on him and arrested him.
"This is my blood of the covenant, One of the bystanders drew his sword,
which will be shed for many. struck the high priests servant, and cut off his ear.
Amen, I say to you, Jesus said to them in reply,
I shall not drink again the fruit of the vine "Have you come out as against a robber,
until the day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God." with swords and clubs, to seize me?
Then, after singing a hymn, Day after day I was with you teaching in the temple area,
they went out to the Mount of Olives. yet you did not arrest me;
but that the Scriptures may be fulfilled."
Then Jesus said to them, And they all left him and fled.
"All of you will have your faith shaken, for it is written: Now a young man followed him
I will strike the shepherd, wearing nothing but a linen cloth about his body.
and the sheep will be dispersed. They seized him,
But after I have been raised up, but he left the cloth behind and ran off naked.
I shall go before you to Galilee."
Peter said to him, They led Jesus away to the high priest,
"Even though all should have their faith shaken, and all the chief priests and the elders and the
mine will not be." scribes came together.
Then Jesus said to him, Peter followed him at a distance into the high priests courtyard
"Amen, I say to you, and was seated with the guards, warming himself at the fire.
this very night before the cock crows twice The chief priests and the entire Sanhedrin
you will deny me three times." kept trying to obtain testimony against Jesus
But he vehemently replied, in order to put him to death, but they found none.
"Even though I should have to die with you, Many gave false witness against him,
I will not deny you." but their testimony did not agree.
And they all spoke similarly. Some took the stand and testified falsely against him,
Then they came to a place named Gethsemane, alleging, "We heard him say,
and he said to his disciples, I will destroy this temple made with hands
"Sit here while I pray." and within three days I will build another
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 72 ---
not made with hands." that the chief priests had handed him over.
Even so their testimony did not agree. But the chief priests stirred up the crowd
The high priest rose before the assembly and questioned Jesus, to have him release Barabbas for them instead.
saying, "Have you no answer? Pilate again said to them in reply,
What are these men testifying against you?" "Then what do you want me to do
But he was silent and answered nothing. with the man you call the king of the Jews?"
Again the high priest asked him and said to him, They shouted again, "Crucify him."
"Are you the Christ, the son of the Blessed One?" Pilate said to them, "Why? What evil has he done?"
Then Jesus answered, "I am; They only shouted the louder, "Crucify him."
and you will see the Son of Man So Pilate, wishing to satisfy the crowd,
seated at the right hand of the Power released Barabbas to them and, after he had Jesus scourged,
and coming with the clouds of heaven." handed him over to be crucified.
At that the high priest tore his garments and said,
"What further need have we of witnesses? The soldiers led him away inside the palace,
You have heard the blasphemy. that is, the praetorium, and assembled the whole cohort.
What do you think?" They clothed him in purple and,
They all condemned him as deserving to die. weaving a crown of thorns, placed it on him.
Some began to spit on him. They began to salute him with, "Hail, King of the Jews!"
They blindfolded him and struck him and said to him, "Prophesy!" and kept striking his head with a reed and spitting upon him.
And the guards greeted him with blows. They knelt before him in homage.
And when they had mocked him,
While Peter was below in the courtyard, they stripped him of the purple cloak,
one of the high priests maids came along. dressed him in his own clothes,
Seeing Peter warming himself, and led him out to crucify him.
she looked intently at him and said,
"You too were with the Nazarene, Jesus." They pressed into service a passer-by, Simon,
But he denied it saying, a Cyrenian, who was coming in from the country,
"I neither know nor understand what you are talking about." the father of Alexander and Unus,
So he went out into the outer court. to carry his cross.
Then the cock crowed.
The maid saw him and began again to say to the bystanders, They brought him to the place of Golgotha
"This man is one of them." —which is translated Place of the Skull—.
Once again he denied it. They gave him wine drugged with myrrh,
A little later the bystanders said to Peter once more, but he did not take it.
"Surely you are one of them; for you too are a Galilean." Then they crucified him and divided his garments
He began to curse and to swear, by casting lots for them to see what each should take.
"I do not know this man about whom you are talking." It was nine o'clock in the morning when they crucified him.
And immediately a cock crowed a second time. The inscription of the charge against him read,
Then Peter remembered the word that Jesus had said to him, "The King of the Jews".
"Before the cock crows twice you will deny me three times." With him they crucified two revolutionaries,
He broke down and wept. one on his right and one on his left.
Those passing by reviled him,
[ As soon as morning came, shaking their heads and saying,
the chief priests with the elders and the scribes, "Aha! You who would destroy the temple
that is, the whole Sanhedrin held a council. and rebuild it in three days,
They bound Jesus, led him away, and handed him over to Pilate. save yourself by coming down from the cross."
Pilate questioned him, Likewise the chief priests, with the scribes,
"Are you the king of the Jews?" mocked him among themselves and said,
He said to him in reply, "You say so." "He saved others; he cannot save himself.
The chief priests accused him of many things. Let the Christ, the King of Israel,
Again Pilate questioned him, come down now from the cross
"Have you no answer? that we may see and believe."
See how many things they accuse you of." Those who were crucified with him also kept abusing him.
Jesus gave him no further answer, so that Pilate was amazed.
At noon darkness came over the whole land
Now on the occasion of the feast he used to release to them until three in the afternoon.
one prisoner whom they requested. And at three oclock Jesus cried out in a loud voice,
A man called Barabbas was then in prison "Eloi, Eloi, lema sabachthani?"
along with the rebels who had committed murder in a rebellion. which is translated,
The crowd came forward and began to ask him "My God, my God, why have you forsaken me?"
to do for them as he was accustomed. Some of the bystanders who heard it said,
Pilate answered, "Look, he is calling Elijah."
"Do you want me to release to you the king of the Jews?" One of them ran, soaked a sponge with wine, put it on a reed
For he knew that it was out of envy and gave it to him to drink saying,
-3-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 73 ---
"Wait, let us see if Elijah comes to take him down."
Jesus gave a loud cry and breathed his last.
[ Here all kneel and pause for a short time. ]
The veil of the sanctuary was torn in two from top to bottom.
When the centurion who stood facing him
saw how he breathed his last he said,
"Truly this man was the Son of God!"
There were also women looking on from a distance.
Among them were Mary Magdalene,
Mary the mother of the younger James and of Joses,
and Salome.
These women had followed him when he was in Galilee
and ministered to him.
There were also many other women
who had come up with him to Jerusalem. ]
When it was already evening,
since it was the day of preparation,
the day before the sabbath, Joseph of Arimathea,
a distinguished member of the council,
who was himself awaiting the kingdom of God,
came and courageously went to Pilate
and asked for the body of Jesus.
Pilate was amazed that he was already dead.
He summoned the centurion
and asked him if Jesus had already died.
And when he learned of it from the centurion,
he gave the body to Joseph.
Having bought a linen cloth, he took him down,
wrapped him in the linen cloth,
and laid him in a tomb that had been hewn out of the rock.
Then he rolled a stone against the entrance to the tomb.
Mary Magdalene and Mary the mother of Joses
watched where he was laid.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
-4-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 74 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS he humbled himself,
PALM SUNDAY—C becoming obedient to the point of death,
even death on a cross.
Because of this, God greatly exalted him
FIRST READING (Is 50:4-7) and bestowed on him the name
which is above every name,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: that at the name of Jesus
every knee should bend,
THE Lord GOD has given me of those in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
a well-trained tongue, and every tongue confess that
that I might know how to speak to the weary Jesus Christ is Lord,
a word that will rouse them. to the glory of God the Father.
Morning after morning
he opens my ear that I may hear; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and I have not rebelled,
have not turned back. VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Phil 2:8-9)
I gave my back to those who beat me,
my cheeks to those who plucked my beard; R. Praise to you, Word of God, Lord Jesus Christ!
my face I did not shield
from buffets and spitting. Christ became obedient to the point of death,
even death on a cross.
The Lord GOD is my help, Because of this, God greatly exalted him
therefore I am not disgraced; and bestowed on him the name which is above every name.—R.
I have set my face like flint,
knowing that I shall not be put to shame. GOSPEL (Lk 22:14-23:56 or 23:1-49)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ according to Luke:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 22:8-9, 17-18, 19-20, 23-24) WHEN the hour came,
Jesus took his place at table with the apostles.
R. (2a) My God, my God, why have you abandoned me? He said to them,
"I have eagerly desired to eat this Passover with you
All who see me scoff at me; before I suffer,
they mock me with parted lips, they wag their heads: for, I tell you, I shall not eat it again
He relied on the LORD; let him deliver him, until there is fulfillment in the kingdom of God."
let him rescue him, if he loves him.—R. Then he took a cup, gave thanks, and said,
"Take this and share it among yourselves;
Indeed, many dogs surround me, for I tell you that from this time on
a pack of evildoers closes in upon me; I shall not drink of the fruit of the vine
They have pierced my hands and my feet; until the kingdom of God comes."
I can count all my bones.—R. Then he took the bread, said the blessing,
broke it, and gave it to them, saying,
They divide my garments among them, "This is my body, which will be given for you;
and for my vesture they cast lots. do this in memory of me."
But you, O LORD, be not far from me; And likewise the cup after they had eaten, saying,
O my help, hasten to aid me.—R. "This cup is the new covenant in my blood,
which will be shed for you.
I will proclaim your name to my brethren;
in the midst of the assembly I will praise you: "And yet behold, the hand of the one who is to betray me
You who fear the LORD, praise him; is with me on the table;
all you descendants of Jacob, give glory to him; for the Son of Man indeed goes as it has been determined;
revere him, all you descendants of Israel!—R. but woe to that man by whom he is betrayed.
And they began to debate among themselves
SECOND READING (Phil 2:6-11) who among them would do such a deed."
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians: Then an argument broke out among them
about which of them should be regarded as the greatest.
CHRIST Jesus, though he was in the form of God, He said to them,
did not regard equality with God "The kings of the Gentiles Lord it over them
something to be grasped. and those in authority over them are addressed as
Rather, he emptied himself, Benefactors;
taking the form of a slave, but among you it shall not be so.
coming in human likeness; Rather, let the greatest among you be as the youngest,
and found human in appearance, and the leader as the servant.
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 75 ---
For who is greater: and cut off his right ear.
the one seated at table or the one who serves? But Jesus said in reply,
Is it not the one seated at table? "Stop, no more of this!"
I am among you as the one who serves. Then he touched the servants ear and healed him.
It is you who have stood by me in my trials; And Jesus said to the chief priests and temple guards
and I confer a kingdom on you, and elders who had come for him,
just as my Father has conferred one on me, "Have you come out as against a robber, with swords
that you may eat and drink at my table in my kingdom; and clubs?
and you will sit on thrones Day after day I was with you in the temple area,
judging the twelve tribes of Israel. and you did not seize me;
but this is your hour, the time for the power of darkness."
"Simon, Simon, behold Satan has demanded
to sift all of you like wheat, After arresting him they led him away
but I have prayed that your own faith may not fail; and took him into the house of the high priest;
and once you have turned back, Peter was following at a distance.
you must strengthen your brothers." They lit a fire in the middle of the courtyard and sat around it,
He said to him, and Peter sat down with them.
"Lord, I am prepared to go to prison and to die with you." When a maid saw him seated in the light,
But he replied, she looked intently at him and said,
"I tell you, Peter, before the cock crows this day, "This man too was with him."
you will deny three times that you know me." But he denied it saying,
"Woman, I do not know him."
He said to them, A short while later someone else saw him and said,
"When I sent you forth without a money bag or a sack "You too are one of them";
or sandals, but Peter answered, "My friend, I am not."
were you in need of anything?" About an hour later, still another insisted,
"No, nothing," they replied. "Assuredly, this man too was with him,
He said to them, for he also is a Galilean."
"But now one who has a money bag should take it, But Peter said,
and likewise a sack, "My friend, I do not know what you are talking about."
and one who does not have a sword Just as he was saying this, the cock crowed,
should sell his cloak and buy one. and the Lord turned and looked at Peter;
For I tell you that this Scripture must be fulfilled in me, and Peter remembered the word of the Lord,
namely, He was counted among the wicked; how he had said to him,
and indeed what is written about me is coming to fulfillment." Before the cock crows today, you will deny me three times.
Then they said, He went out and began to weep bitterly.
"Lord, look, there are two swords here." The men who held Jesus in custody were ridiculing and beating him.
But he replied, "It is enough!" They blindfolded him and questioned him, saying,
"Prophesy! Who is it that struck you?"
Then going out, he went, as was his custom, to the Mount of Olives, And they reviled him in saying many other things against him.
and the disciples followed him.
When he arrived at the place he said to them, When day came the council of elders of the people met,
"Pray that you may not undergo the test." both chief priests and scribes,
After withdrawing about a stones throw from them and kneeling, and they brought him before their Sanhedrin.
he prayed, saying, "Father, if you are willing, They said, "If you are the Christ, tell us,"
take this cup away from me; but he replied to them, "If I tell you, you will not believe,
still, not my will but yours be done." and if I question, you will not respond.
And to strengthen him an angel from heaven appeared to him. But from this time on the Son of Man will be seated
He was in such agony and he prayed so fervently at the right hand of the power of God."
that his sweat became like drops of blood They all asked, "Are you then the Son of God?"
falling on the ground. He replied to them, "You say that I am."
When he rose from prayer and returned to his disciples, Then they said, "What further need have we for testimony?
he found them sleeping from grief. We have heard it from his own mouth."
He said to them, "Why are you sleeping?
Get up and pray that you may not undergo the test." [ Then the whole assembly of them arose and brought him
before Pilate.
While he was still speaking, a crowd approached They brought charges against him, saying,
and in front was one of the Twelve, a man named Judas. "We found this man misleading our people;
He went up to Jesus to kiss him. he opposes the payment of taxes to Caesar
Jesus said to him, and maintains that he is the Christ, a king."
"Judas, are you betraying the Son of Man with a kiss?" Pilate asked him, Are you the king of the Jews?
His disciples realized what was about to happen, and they asked, He said to him in reply, "You say so."
"Lord, shall we strike with a sword?" Pilate then addressed the chief priests and the crowds,
And one of them struck the high priests servant "I find this man not guilty."
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 76 ---
But they were adamant and said, and the breasts that never nursed.
"He is inciting the people with his teaching At that time people will say to the mountains,
throughout all Judea, Fall upon us!
from Galilee where he began even to here." and to the hills, Cover us!
for if these things are done when the wood is green
On hearing this Pilate asked if the man was a Galilean; what will happen when it is dry?"
and upon learning that he was under Herod's jurisdiction, Now two others, both criminals,
he sent him to Herod who was in Jerusalem at that time. were led away with him to be executed.
Herod was very glad to see Jesus;
he had been wanting to see him for a long time, When they came to the place called the Skull,
for he had heard about him they crucified him and the criminals there,
and had been hoping to see him perform some sign. one on his right, the other on his left.
He questioned him at length, Then Jesus said,
but he gave him no answer. "Father, forgive them, they know not what they do."
The chief priests and scribes, meanwhile, They divided his garments by casting lots.
stood by accusing him harshly. The people stood by and watched;
Herod and his soldiers treated him contemptuously and mocked him, the rulers, meanwhile, sneered at him and said,
and after clothing him in resplendent garb, "He saved others, let him save himself
he sent him back to Pilate. if he is the chosen one, the Christ of God."
Herod and Pilate became friends that very day, Even the soldiers jeered at him.
even though they had been enemies formerly. As they approached to offer him wine they called out,
Pilate then summoned the chief priests, the rulers, and the people If you are King of the Jews, save yourself.
and said to them, "You brought this man to me Above him there was an inscription that read,
and accused him of inciting the people to revolt. "This is the King of the Jews."
I have conducted my investigation in your presence
and have not found this man guilty Now one of the criminals hanging there reviled Jesus, saying,
of the charges you have brought against him, "Are you not the Christ?
nor did Herod, for he sent him back to us. Save yourself and us."
So no capital crime has been committed by him. The other, however, rebuking him, said in reply,
Therefore I shall have him flogged and then release him." "Have you no fear of God,
for you are subject to the same condemnation?
But all together they shouted out, And indeed, we have been condemned justly,
"Away with this man! for the sentence we received corresponds to our crimes,
Release Barabbas to us." but this man has done nothing criminal."
—Now Barabbas had been imprisoned for a rebellion Then he said,
that had taken place in the city and for murder.— "Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom."
Again Pilate addressed them, still wishing to release Jesus, He replied to him,
but they continued their shouting, "Amen, I say to you,
"Crucify him! Crucify him!" today you will be with me in Paradise."
Pilate addressed them a third time,
"What evil has this man done? It was now about noon and darkness came over the whole land
I found him guilty of no capital crime. until three in the afternoon
Therefore I shall have him flogged and then release him." because of an eclipse of the sun.
With loud shouts, however, Then the veil of the temple was torn down the middle.
they persisted in calling for his crucifixion, Jesus cried out in a loud voice,
and their voices prevailed. "Father, into your hands I commend my spirit";
The verdict of Pilate was that their demand should be granted. and when he had said this he breathed his last.
So he released the man who had been imprisoned
for rebellion and murder, for whom they asked, [ Here all kneel and pause for a short time. ]
and he handed Jesus over to them to deal with as they wished.
The centurion who witnessed what had happened glorified God and said,
As they led him away "This man was innocent beyond doubt."
they took hold of a certain Simon, a Cyrenian, When all the people who had gathered for this spectacle
who was coming in from the country; saw what had happened,
and after laying the cross on him, they returned home beating their breasts;
they made him carry it behind Jesus. but all his acquaintances stood at a distance,
A large crowd of people followed Jesus, including the women who had followed him from Galilee
including many women who mourned and lamented him. and saw these events. ]
Jesus turned to them and said,
"Daughters of Jerusalem, do not weep for me; Now there was a virtuous and righteous man named Joseph who,
weep instead for yourselves and for your children though he was a member of the council,
for indeed, the days are coming when people will say, had not consented to their plan of action.
Blessed are the barren, He came from the Jewish town of Arimathea
the wombs that never bore and was awaiting the kingdom of God.
-3-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 77 ---
He went to Pilate and asked for the body of Jesus.
After he had taken the body down,
he wrapped it in a linen cloth
and laid him in a rock-hewn tomb
in which no one had yet been buried.
It was the day of preparation,
and the sabbath was about to begin.
The women who had come from Galilee with him followed behind,
and when they had seen the tomb
and the way in which his body was laid in it,
they returned and prepared spices and perfumed oils.
Then they rested on the sabbath according to the commandment.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
-4-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 78 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (1 Cor 11:23-26)
HOLY THURSDAY (MASS OF THE LORD'S SUPPER)—ABC
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
FIRST READING (Ex 12:1-8, 11-14) BROTHERS and sisters:
I received from the Lord what I also handed on to you,
A reading from the Book of Exodus: that the Lord Jesus, on the night he was handed over,
took bread, and, after he had given thanks,
THE LORD said to Moses and Aaron in the land of Egypt, broke it and said, “This is my body that is for you.
Do this in remembrance of me.”
“This month shall stand at the head of your calendar;
In the same way also the cup, after supper, saying,
you shall reckon it the first month of the year.
“This cup is the new covenant in my blood.
Tell the whole community of Israel:
Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me.”
On the tenth of this month every one of your families
For as often as you eat this bread and drink the cup,
must procure for itself a lamb, one apiece for each household.
you proclaim the death of the Lord until he comes.
If a family is too small for a whole lamb,
it shall join the nearest household in procuring one
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and shall share in the lamb
in proportion to the number of persons who partake of it.
VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (John 13:34)
The lamb must be a year-old male and without blemish.
You may take it from either the sheep or the goats.
I give you a new commandment, says the Lord:
You shall keep it until the fourteenth day of this month,
love one another as I have loved you.
and then, with the whole assembly of Israel present,
it shall be slaughtered during the evening twilight.
GOSPEL (Jn 13:1-15)
They shall take some of its blood
and apply it to the two doorposts and the lintel
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
of every house in which they partake of the lamb.
That same night they shall eat its roasted flesh
BEFORE the feast of Passover, Jesus knew that his hour had come
with unleavened bread and bitter herbs.
to pass from this world to the Father.
He loved his own in the world and he loved them to the end.
“This is how you are to eat it:
The devil had already induced Judas, son of Simon the Iscariot,
with your loins girt, sandals on your feet and your staff in hand,
to hand him over.
you shall eat like those who are in flight.
So, during supper,
It is the Passover of the LORD.
fully aware that the Father had put everything into his power
For on this same night I will go through Egypt,
and that he had come from God and was returning to God,
striking down every firstborn of the land, both man and beast,
he rose from supper and took off his outer garments.
and executing judgment on all the gods of Egypt—I, the LORD!
He took a towel and tied it around his waist.
But the blood will mark the houses where you are.
Then he poured water into a basin
Seeing the blood, I will pass over you;
and began to wash the disciples’ feet
thus, when I strike the land of Egypt,
and dry them with the towel around his waist.
no destructive blow will come upon you.
He came to Simon Peter, who said to him,
“Master, are you going to wash my feet?”
“This day shall be a memorial feast for you,
Jesus answered and said to him,
which all your generations shall celebrate “What I am doing, you do not understand now,
with pilgrimage to the LORD, as a perpetual institution.” but you will understand later.”
Peter said to him, “You will never wash my feet.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Jesus answered him,
“Unless I wash you, you will have no inheritance with me.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 116:12-13, 15-16bc, 17-18) Simon Peter said to him,
“Master, then not only my feet, but my hands and head as well.”
R. (cf. 1 Cor 10:16) Our blessing-cup is a communion with the Blood Jesus said to him,
of Christ. “Whoever has bathed has no need except to have his feet washed,
for he is clean all over;
How shall I make a return to the LORD so you are clean, but not all.”
for all the good he has done for me? For he knew who would betray him;
The cup of salvation I will take up, for this reason, he said, “Not all of you are clean.”
and I will call upon the name of the LORD.—R.
So when he had washed their feet
Precious in the eyes of the LORD and put his garments back on and reclined at table again,
is the death of his faithful ones. he said to them, “Do you realize what I have done for you?
I am your servant, the son of your handmaid; You call me ‘teacher’ and ‘master,’ and rightly so, for indeed I am.
you have loosed my bonds.—R. If I, therefore, the master and teacher, have washed your feet,
you ought to wash one another’s feet.
To you will I offer sacrifice of thanksgiving, I have given you a model to follow,
and I will call upon the name of the LORD. so that as I have done for you, you should also do.”
My vows to the LORD I will pay
in the presence of all his people.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 79 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS in fullness of days;
GOOD FRIDAY OF THE LORD'S PASSION—ABC through his suffering, my servant shall justify many,
and their guilt he shall bear.
Therefore I will give him his portion among the great,
FIRST READING (Is 52:13-53:12) and he shall divide the spoils with the mighty,
because he surrendered himself to death
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: and was counted among the wicked;
and he shall take away the sins of many,
SEE, my servant shall prosper, and win pardon for their offenses.
he shall be raised high and greatly exalted.
Even as many were amazed at him- The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
so marred was his look beyond human semblance
and his appearance beyond that of the sons of man- RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 31:2, 6, 12-13, 15-16, 17, 25)
so shall he startle many nations,
because of him kings shall stand speechless; R. (Luke 23:46) Father, into your hands I commend my spirit.
for those who have not been told shall see,
those who have not heard shall ponder it. In you, O LORD, I take refuge;
let me never be put to shame.
Who would believe what we have heard? In your justice rescue me.
To whom has the arm of the LORD been revealed? Into your hands I commend my spirit;
He grew up like a sapling before him, you will redeem me, O LORD, O faithful God.—R.
like a shoot from the parched earth;
there was in him no stately bearing to make us look at him, For all my foes I am an object of reproach,
nor appearance that would attract us to him. a laughingstock to my neighbors, and a dread to my friends;
He was spurned and avoided by people, they who see me abroad flee from me.
a man of suffering, accustomed to infirmity, I am forgotten like the unremembered dead;
one of those from whom people hide their faces, I am like a dish that is broken.—R.
spurned, and we held him in no esteem.
But my trust is in you, O LORD;
Yet it was our infirmities that he bore, I say, `"You are my God.
our sufferings that he endured, In your hands is my destiny; rescue me
while we thought of him as stricken, from the clutches of my enemies and my persecutors."—R.
as one smitten by God and afflicted.
But he was pierced for our offenses, Let your face shine upon your servant;
crushed for our sins; save me in your kindness.
upon him was the chastisement that makes us whole, Take courage and be stouthearted,
by his stripes we were healed. all you who hope in the LORD.—R.
We had all gone astray like sheep,
each following his own way; SECOND READING (Heb 4:14-16; 5:7-9)
but the LORD laid upon him
the guilt of us all. A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
Though he was harshly treated, he submitted BROTHERS and sisters:
and opened not his mouth; Since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens,
like a lamb led to the slaughter Jesus, the Son of God,
or a sheep before the shearers, let us hold fast to our confession.
he was silent and opened not his mouth. For we do not have a high priest
Oppressed and condemned, he was taken away, who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses,
and who would have thought any more of his destiny? but one who has similarly been tested in every way,
When he was cut off from the land of the living, yet without sin.
and smitten for the sin of his people, So let us confidently approach the throne of grace
a grave was assigned him among the wicked to receive mercy and to find grace for timely help.
and a burial place with evildoers,
though he had done no wrong In the days when Christ was in the flesh,
nor spoken any falsehood. he offered prayers and supplications with loud cries and tears
But the LORD was pleased to the one who was able to save him from death,
to crush him in infirmity. and he was heard because of his reverence.
Son though he was, he learned obedience from what he suffered;
If he gives his life as an offering for sin, and when he was made perfect,
he shall see his descendants in a long life, he became the source of eternal salvation for all who obey him.
and the will of the LORD shall be accomplished through him.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Because of his affliction
he shall see the light
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 80 ---
VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Phil 2:8-9) Jesus answered him,
"I have spoken publicly to the world.
Christ became obedient to the point of death, I have always taught in a synagogue
even death on a cross. or in the temple area where all the Jews gather,
Because of this, God greatly exalted him and in secret I have said nothing. Why ask me?
and bestowed on him the name which is above every other name. Ask those who heard me what I said to them.
They know what I said."
GOSPEL (cf. Jn 18:1-19:42) When he had said this,
one of the temple guards standing there struck Jesus and said,
The Passion of our Lord Jesus Christ according to John: "Is this the way you answer the high priest?"
Jesus answered him,
JESUS went out with his disciples across the Kidron valley "If I have spoken wrongly, testify to the wrong;
to where there was a garden, but if I have spoken rightly, why do you strike me?"
into which he and his disciples entered. Then Annas sent him bound to Caiaphas the high priest.
Judas his betrayer also knew the place,
because Jesus had often met there with his disciples. Now Simon Peter was standing there keeping warm.
So Judas got a band of soldiers and guards And they said to him,
from the chief priests and the Pharisees "You are not one of his disciples, are you?"
and went there with lanterns, torches, and weapons. He denied it and said,
Jesus, knowing everything that was going to happen to him, "I am not."
went out and said to them, "Whom are you looking for?" One of the slaves of the high priest,
They answered him, "Jesus the Nazarene." a relative of the one whose ear Peter had cut off, said,
He said to them, "I AM." "Didn't I see you in the garden with him?"
Judas his betrayer was also with them. Again Peter denied it.
When he said to them, "I AM, " And immediately the cock crowed.
they turned away and fell to the ground.
So he again asked them, Then they brought Jesus from Caiaphas to the praetorium.
"Whom are you looking for?" It was morning.
They said, "Jesus the Nazarene." And they themselves did not enter the praetorium,
Jesus answered, in order not to be defiled so that they could eat the Passover.
"I told you that I AM. So Pilate came out to them and said,
So if you are looking for me, let these men go." "What charge do you bring against this man?"
This was to fulfill what he had said, They answered and said to him,
"I have not lost any of those you gave me." "If he were not a criminal,
Then Simon Peter, who had a sword, drew it, we would not have handed him over to you."
struck the high priest's slave, and cut off his right ear. At this, Pilate said to them,
The slave's name was Malchus. "Take him yourselves, and judge him according to your law."
Jesus said to Peter, The Jews answered him,
"Put your sword into its scabbard. "We do not have the right to execute anyone, "
Shall I not drink the cup that the Father gave me?" in order that the word of Jesus might be fulfilled
that he said indicating the kind of death he would die.
So the band of soldiers, the tribune, and the Jewish guards seized Jesus, So Pilate went back into the praetorium
bound him, and brought him to Annas first. and summoned Jesus and said to him,
He was the father-in-law of Caiaphas, "Are you the King of the Jews?"
who was high priest that year. Jesus answered,
It was Caiaphas who had counseled the Jews "Do you say this on your own
that it was better that one man should die rather than the people. or have others told you about me?"
Pilate answered,
Simon Peter and another disciple followed Jesus. "I am not a Jew, am I?
Now the other disciple was known to the high priest, Your own nation and the chief priests handed you over to me.
and he entered the courtyard of the high priest with Jesus. What have you done?"
But Peter stood at the gate outside. Jesus answered,
So the other disciple, the acquaintance of the high priest, "My kingdom does not belong to this world.
went out and spoke to the gatekeeper and brought Peter in. If my kingdom did belong to this world,
Then the maid who was the gatekeeper said to Peter, my attendants would be fighting
"You are not one of this man's disciples, are you?" to keep me from being handed over to the Jews.
He said, "I am not." But as it is, my kingdom is not here."
Now the slaves and the guards were standing around a charcoal fire So Pilate said to him,
that they had made, because it was cold, "Then you are a king?"
and were warming themselves. Jesus answered,
Peter was also standing there keeping warm. "You say I am a king.
For this I was born and for this I came into the world,
The high priest questioned Jesus to testify to the truth.
about his disciples and about his doctrine. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice."
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 81 ---
Pilate said to him, "What is truth?" he went out to what is called the Place of the Skull,
in Hebrew, Golgotha.
When he had said this, There they crucified him, and with him two others,
he again went out to the Jews and said to them, one on either side, with Jesus in the middle.
"I find no guilt in him. Pilate also had an inscription written and put on the cross.
But you have a custom that I release one prisoner to you at Passover. It read,
Do you want me to release to you the King of the Jews?" "Jesus the Nazarene, the King of the Jews."
They cried out again, Now many of the Jews read this inscription,
"Not this one but Barabbas!" because the place where Jesus was crucified was near the city;
Now Barabbas was a revolutionary. and it was written in Hebrew, Latin, and Greek.
So the chief priests of the Jews said to Pilate,
Then Pilate took Jesus and had him scourged. "Do not write 'The King of the Jews,'
And the soldiers wove a crown out of thorns and placed it on his head, but that he said, 'I am the King of the Jews'."
and clothed him in a purple cloak, Pilate answered,
and they came to him and said, "What I have written, I have written."
"Hail, King of the Jews!"
And they struck him repeatedly. When the soldiers had crucified Jesus,
Once more Pilate went out and said to them, they took his clothes and divided them into four shares,
"Look, I am bringing him out to you, a share for each soldier.
so that you may know that I find no guilt in him." They also took his tunic, but the tunic was seamless,
So Jesus came out, woven in one piece from the top down.
wearing the crown of thorns and the purple cloak. So they said to one another,
And he said to them, "Behold, the man!" "Let's not tear it, but cast lots for it to see whose it will be, "
When the chief priests and the guards saw him they cried out, in order that the passage of Scripture might be fulfilled that says:
"Crucify him, crucify him!" They divided my garments among them,
Pilate said to them, and for my vesture they cast lots.
"Take him yourselves and crucify him. This is what the soldiers did.
I find no guilt in him." Standing by the cross of Jesus were his mother
The Jews answered, and his mother's sister, Mary the wife of Clopas,
"We have a law, and according to that law he ought to die, and Mary of Magdala.
because he made himself the Son of God." When Jesus saw his mother and the disciple there whom he loved
Now when Pilate heard this statement, he said to his mother, "Woman, behold, your son."
he became even more afraid, Then he said to the disciple,
and went back into the praetorium and said to Jesus, "Behold, your mother."
"Where are you from?" And from that hour the disciple took her into his home.
Jesus did not answer him.
So Pilate said to him, After this, aware that everything was now finished,
"Do you not speak to me? in order that the Scripture might be fulfilled,
Do you not know that I have power to release you Jesus said, "I thirst."
and I have power to crucify you?" There was a vessel filled with common wine.
Jesus answered him, So they put a sponge soaked in wine on a sprig of hyssop
"You would have no power over me and put it up to his mouth.
if it had not been given to you from above. When Jesus had taken the wine, he said,
For this reason the one who handed me over to you "It is finished."
has the greater sin." And bowing his head, he handed over the spirit.
Consequently, Pilate tried to release him; but the Jews cried out,
"If you release him, you are not a Friend of Caesar. [ Here all kneel and pause for a short time. ]
Everyone who makes himself a king opposes Caesar."
Now since it was preparation day,
When Pilate heard these words he brought Jesus out in order that the bodies might not remain
and seated him on the judge's bench on the cross on the sabbath,
in the place called Stone Pavement, in Hebrew, Gabbatha. for the sabbath day of that week was a solemn one,
It was preparation day for Passover, and it was about noon. the Jews asked Pilate that their legs be broken
And he said to the Jews, and that they be taken down.
"Behold, your king!" So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first
They cried out, and then of the other one who was crucified with Jesus.
"Take him away, take him away! Crucify him!" But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead,
Pilate said to them, they did not break his legs,
"Shall I crucify your king?" but one soldier thrust his lance into his side,
The chief priests answered, and immediately blood and water flowed out.
"We have no king but Caesar." An eyewitness has testified, and his testimony is true;
Then he handed him over to them to be crucified. he knows that he is speaking the truth,
so that you also may come to believe.
So they took Jesus, and, carrying the cross himself, For this happened so that the Scripture passage might be fulfilled:
-3-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 82 ---
Not a bone of it will be broken.
And again another passage says:
They will look upon him whom they have pierced.
After this, Joseph of Arimathea,
secretly a disciple of Jesus for fear of the Jews,
asked Pilate if he could remove the body of Jesus.
And Pilate permitted it.
So he came and took his body.
Nicodemus, the one who had first come to him at night,
also came bringing a mixture of myrrh and aloes
weighing about one hundred pounds.
They took the body of Jesus
and bound it with burial cloths along with the spices,
according to the Jewish burial custom.
Now in the place where he had been crucified there was a garden,
and in the garden a new tomb, in which no one had yet been buried.
So they laid Jesus there because of the Jewish preparation day;
for the tomb was close by.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
-4-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 83 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS to shed light upon the earth.”
EASTER VIGIL—ABC And so it happened:
God made the two great lights,
Nine readings are assigned to the Easter Vigil: seven from the OT and two the greater one to govern the day,
from the NT. If circumstances demand in individual cases, the number of and the lesser one to govern the night;
prescribed readings may be reduced. Three selections from the OT, and he made the stars.
however, should be read before the epistle and Gospel, although when God set them in the dome of the sky,
necessary, two may be read. In any case, the reading from Exodus about to shed light upon the earth,
the escape through the Red Sea (reading 3) should never be omitted. to govern the day and the night,
and to separate the light from the darkness.
God saw how good it was.
FIRST READING Evening came, and morning followed—the fourth day.
A Longer Form (Gn 1:1-2:2) Then God said,
“Let the water teem with an abundance of living creatures,
A reading from the Book of Genesis: and on the earth let birds fly beneath the dome of the sky.”
And so it happened:
IN the beginning, when God created the heavens and the earth, God created the great sea monsters
the earth was a formless wasteland, and darkness covered and all kinds of swimming creatures with which the water
the abyss, teems,
while a mighty wind swept over the waters. and all kinds of winged birds.
God saw how good it was, and God blessed them, saying,
Then God said, “Be fertile, multiply, and fill the water of the seas;
“Let there be light,” and there was light. and let the birds multiply on the earth.”
God saw how good the light was. Evening came, and morning followed—the fifth day.
God then separated the light from the darkness.
God called the light “day, ” and the darkness he called “night.” Then God said,
Thus evening came, and morning followed—the first day. “Let the earth bring forth all kinds of living creatures:
cattle, creeping things, and wild animals of all kinds.”
Then God said, And so it happened:
“Let there be a dome in the middle of the waters, God made all kinds of wild animals, all kinds of cattle,
to separate one body of water from the other.” and all kinds of creeping things of the earth.
And so it happened: God saw how good it was.
God made the dome, Then God said:
and it separated the water above the dome from the water “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness.
below it. Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea,
God called the dome “the sky.” the birds of the air, and the cattle,
Evening came, and morning followed—the second day. and over all the wild animals
and all the creatures that crawl on the ground.”
Then God said, God created man in his image;
“Let the water under the sky be gathered into a single basin, in the image of God he created him;
so that the dry land may appear.” male and female he created them.
And so it happened: God blessed them, saying:
the water under the sky was gathered into its basin, “Be fertile and multiply;
and the dry land appeared. fill the earth and subdue it.
God called the dry land “the earth, ” Have dominion over the fish of the sea, the birds of the air,
and the basin of the water he called “the sea.” and all the living things that move on the earth.”
God saw how good it was. God also said:
Then God said, “See, I give you every seed-bearing plant all over the earth
“Let the earth bring forth vegetation: and every tree that has seed-bearing fruit on it to be your food;
every kind of plant that bears seed and to all the animals of the land, all the birds of the air,
and every kind of fruit tree on earth and all the living creatures that crawl on the ground,
that bears fruit with its seed in it.” I give all the green plants for food.”
And so it happened: And so it happened.
the earth brought forth every kind of plant that bears seed God looked at everything he had made, and he found it very good.
and every kind of fruit tree on earth Evening came, and morning followed—the sixth day.
that bears fruit with its seed in it.
God saw how good it was. Thus the heavens and the earth and all their array were completed.
Evening came, and morning followed—the third day. Since on the seventh day God was finished
with the work he had been doing,
Then God said: he rested on the seventh day from all the work he had
“Let there be lights in the dome of the sky, undertaken.
to separate day from night.
Let them mark the fixed times, the days and the years, The word of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and serve as luminaries in the dome of the sky,
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 84 ---
OR B (Psalm 33:4-5, 6-7, 12-13, 20-22)
B Shorter Form (Gn 1:1, 26-31a) R. (5b) The earth is full of the goodness of the Lord.
A reading from the Book of Genesis: Upright is the word of the LORD,
and all his works are trustworthy.
IN the beginning, when God created the heavens and the earth, He loves justice and right;
God said: “Let us make man in our image, after our likeness. of the kindness of the LORD the earth is full.—R.
Let them have dominion over the fish of the sea,
the birds of the air, and the cattle, By the word of the LORD the heavens were made;
and over all the wild animals by the breath of his mouth all their host.
and all the creatures that crawl on the ground. He gathers the waters of the sea as in a flask;—R.
God created man in his image;
in the image of God he created him; Blessed the nation whose God is the LORD,
male and female he created them. the people he has chosen for his own inheritance.
God blessed them, saying: From heaven the LORD looks down;
“Be fertile and multiply; he sees all mankind.—R.
fill the earth and subdue it.
Have dominion over the fish of the sea, the birds of the air, Our soul waits for the LORD,
and all the living things that move on the earth.” who is our help and our shield.
God also said: May your kindness, O LORD, be upon us
“See, I give you every seed-bearing plant all over the earth who have put our hope in you.—R.
and every tree that has seed-bearing fruit on it to be your food;
and to all the animals of the land, all the birds of the air, SECOND READING
and all the living creatures that crawl on the ground,
I give all the green plants for food.” A Longer Form (Gn 22:1-18)
And so it happened.
God looked at everything he had made, and found it very good. A reading from the Book of Genesis:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. GOD put Abraham to the test.
He called to him, “Abraham!”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM “Here I am,” he replied.
Then God said:
A (Psalm 104:1-2, 5-6, 10, 12, 13-14, 24, 35) “Take your son Isaac, your only one, whom you love,
and go to the land of Moriah.
R. (30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. There you shall offer him up as a holocaust
on a height that I will point out to you.”
Bless the LORD, O my soul! Early the next morning Abraham saddled his donkey,
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! took with him his son Isaac and two of his servants as well,
You are clothed with majesty and glory, and with the wood that he had cut for the holocaust,
robed in light as with a cloak.—R. set out for the place of which God had told him.
You fixed the earth upon its foundation, On the third day Abraham got sight of the place from afar.
not to be moved forever; Then he said to his servants:
with the ocean, as with a garment, you covered it; “Both of you stay here with the donkey,
above the mountains the waters stood.—R. while the boy and I go on over yonder.
We will worship and then come back to you.”
You send forth springs into the watercourses Thereupon Abraham took the wood for the holocaust
that wind among the mountains. and laid it on his son Isaac’s shoulders,
Beside them the birds of heaven dwell; while he himself carried the fire and the knife.
from among the branches they send forth their song.—R. As the two walked on together, Isaac spoke to his father Abraham:
“Father!” Isaac said.
You water the mountains from your palace; “Yes, son, ” he replied.
the earth is replete with the fruit of your works. Isaac continued, “Here are the fire and the wood,
You raise grass for the cattle, but where is the sheep for the holocaust?”
and vegetation for man’s use, “Son,” Abraham answered,
Producing bread from the earth.—R. “God himself will provide the sheep for the holocaust.”
Then the two continued going forward.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
In wisdom you have wrought them all— When they came to the place of which God had told him,
the earth is full of your creatures. Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it.
Bless the LORD, O my soul! Alleluia.—R. Next he tied up his son Isaac,
and put him on top of the wood on the altar.
OR Then he reached out and took the knife to slaughter his son.
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 85 ---
But the LORD’S messenger called to him from heaven, in not withholding from me your beloved son,
“Abraham, Abraham!” I will bless you abundantly
“Here I am!” he answered. and make your descendants as countless
“Do not lay your hand on the boy, ” said the messenger. as the stars of the sky and the sands of the seashore;
“Do not do the least thing to him. your descendants shall take possession
I know now how devoted you are to God, of the gates of their enemies,
since you did not withhold from me your own beloved son.” and in your descendants all the nations of the earth shall
As Abraham looked about, find blessing—
he spied a ram caught by its horns in the thicket. all this because you obeyed my command.”
So he went and took the ram
and offered it up as a holocaust in place of his son. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Abraham named the site Yahweh-yireh;
hence people now say, “On the mountain the LORD will see.” RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 16:5, 8, 9-10, 11)
Again the LORD’S messenger called to Abraham from heaven R. (1) You are my inheritance, O Lord.
and said:
“I swear by myself, declares the LORD, O LORD, my allotted portion and my cup,
that because you acted as you did you it is who hold fast my lot.
in not withholding from me your beloved son, I set the LORD ever before me;
I will bless you abundantly with him at my right hand I shall not be disturbed.—R.
and make your descendants as countless
as the stars of the sky and the sands of the seashore; Therefore my heart is glad and my soul rejoices,
your descendants shall take possession my body, too, abides in confidence;
of the gates of their enemies, because you will not abandon my soul to the netherworld,
and in your descendants all the nations of the earth shall nor will you suffer your faithful one to undergo corruption.—R.
find blessing—
all this because you obeyed my command.” You will show me the path to life,
fullness of joys in your presence,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. the delights at your right hand forever.—R.
OR THIRD READING (Ex 14:15-15:1)
B Shorter Form (Gn 22:1-2, 9a, 10-13, 15-18) A reading from the Book of Exodus:
A reading from the Book of Genesis: THE LORD said to Moses, “Why are you crying out to me?
Tell the Israelites to go forward.
GOD put Abraham to the test. And you, lift up your staff and, with hand outstretched over the sea,
He called to him, “Abraham!” split the sea in two,
“Here I am,” he replied. that the Israelites may pass through it on dry land.
Then God said: But I will make the Egyptians so obstinate
“Take your son Isaac, your only one, whom you love, that they will go in after them.
and go to the land of Moriah. Then I will receive glory through Pharaoh and all his army,
There you shall offer him up as a holocaust his chariots and charioteers.
on a height that I will point out to you.” The Egyptians shall know that I am the LORD,
when I receive glory through Pharaoh
When they came to the place of which God had told him, and his chariots and charioteers.”
Abraham built an altar there and arranged the wood on it.
Then he reached out and took the knife to slaughter his son. The angel of God, who had been leading Israel’s camp,
But the LORD’S messenger called to him from heaven, now moved and went around behind them.
“Abraham, Abraham!” The column of cloud also, leaving the front,
“Here I am, ” he answered. took up its place behind them,
“Do not lay your hand on the boy, ” said the messenger. so that it came between the camp of the Egyptians
“Do not do the least thing to him. and that of Israel.
I know now how devoted you are to God, But the cloud now became dark, and thus the night passed
since you did not withhold from me your own beloved son.” without the rival camps coming any closer together
As Abraham looked about, all night long.
he spied a ram caught by its horns in the thicket. Then Moses stretched out his hand over the sea,
So he went and took the ram and the LORD swept the sea
and offered it up as a holocaust in place of his son. with a strong east wind throughout the night
and so turned it into dry land.
Again the LORD’S messenger called to Abraham from heaven When the water was thus divided,
and said: the Israelites marched into the midst of the sea on dry land,
“I swear by myself, declares the LORD, with the water like a wall to their right and to their left.
that because you acted as you did
-3-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 86 ---
The Egyptians followed in pursuit; FOURTH READING (Is 54:5-14)
all Pharaoh’s horses and chariots and charioteers went after them
right into the midst of the sea. A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
In the night watch just before dawn
the LORD cast through the column of the fiery cloud THE One who has become your husband is your Maker;
upon the Egyptian force a glance that threw it into a panic; his name is the LORD of hosts;
and he so clogged their chariot wheels your redeemer is the Holy One of Israel,
that they could hardly drive. called God of all the earth.
With that the Egyptians sounded the retreat before Israel, The LORD calls you back,
because the LORD was fighting for them against the Egyptians. like a wife forsaken and grieved in spirit,
a wife married in youth and then cast off,
Then the LORD told Moses, “Stretch out your hand over the sea, says your God.
that the water may flow back upon the Egyptians, For a brief moment I abandoned you,
upon their chariots and their charioteers.” but with great tenderness I will take you back.
So Moses stretched out his hand over the sea, In an outburst of wrath, for a moment
and at dawn the sea flowed back to its normal depth. I hid my face from you;
The Egyptians were fleeing head on toward the sea, but with enduring love I take pity on you,
when the LORD hurled them into its midst. says the LORD, your redeemer.
As the water flowed back, This is for me like the days of Noah,
it covered the chariots and the charioteers of Pharaoh’s whole army when I swore that the waters of Noah
which had followed the Israelites into the sea. should never again deluge the earth;
Not a single one of them escaped. so I have sworn not to be angry with you,
But the Israelites had marched on dry land or to rebuke you.
through the midst of the sea, Though the mountains leave their place
with the water like a wall to their right and to their left. and the hills be shaken,
Thus the LORD saved Israel on that day my love shall never leave you
from the power of the Egyptians. nor my covenant of peace be shaken,
When Israel saw the Egyptians lying dead on the seashore says the LORD, who has mercy on you.
and beheld the great power that the LORD O afflicted one, storm-battered and unconsoled,
had shown against the Egyptians, I lay your pavements in carnelians,
they feared the LORD and believed in him and in his servant Moses. and your foundations in sapphires;
I will make your battlements of rubies,
Then Moses and the Israelites sang this song to the LORD: your gates of carbuncles,
I will sing to the LORD, for he is gloriously triumphant; and all your walls of precious stones.
horse and chariot he has cast into the sea. All your children shall be taught by the LORD,
and great shall be the peace of your children.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. In justice shall you be established,
far from the fear of oppression,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Ex 15:1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 17-18) where destruction cannot come near you.
R. (1b) Let us sing to the Lord; he has covered himself in glory. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
I will sing to the LORD, for he is gloriously triumphant; RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 30:2, 4, 5-6, 11-12, 13)
horse and chariot he has cast into the sea.
My strength and my courage is the LORD, R. (2a) I will praise you, Lord, for you have rescued me.
and he has been my savior.
He is my God, I praise him; I will extol you, O LORD, for you drew me clear
the God of my father, I extol him.—R. and did not let my enemies rejoice over me.
O LORD, you brought me up from the netherworld;
The LORD is a warrior, you preserved me from among those going down into the pit.—R.
LORD is his name!
Pharaoh’s chariots and army he hurled into the sea; Sing praise to the LORD, you his faithful ones,
the elite of his officers were submerged in the Red Sea.—R. and give thanks to his holy name.
For his anger lasts but a moment;
The flood waters covered them, a lifetime, his good will.
they sank into the depths like a stone. At nightfall, weeping enters in,
Your right hand, O LORD, magnificent in power, but with the dawn, rejoicing.—R.
your right hand, O LORD, has shattered the enemy.—R.
Hear, O LORD, and have pity on me;
You brought in the people you redeemed O LORD, be my helper.
and planted them on the mountain of your inheritance— You changed my mourning into dancing;
the place where you made your seat, O LORD, O LORD, my God, forever will I give you thanks.—R.
the sanctuary, LORD, which your hands established.
The LORD shall reign forever and ever.—R.
-4-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 87 ---
FIFTH READING (Is 55:1-11) Give thanks to the LORD, acclaim his name;
among the nations make known his deeds,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: proclaim how exalted is his name.—R.
THUS says the LORD: Sing praise to the LORD for his glorious achievement;
All you who are thirsty, let this be known throughout all the earth.
come to the water! Shout with exultation, O city of Zion,
You who have no money, for great in your midst
come, receive grain and eat; is the Holy One of Israel!—R.
come, without paying and without cost,
drink wine and milk! SIXTH READING (Bar 3:9-15, 32—4:4)
Why spend your money for what is not bread,
your wages for what fails to satisfy? A reading from the Book of the Prophet Baruch:
Heed me, and you shall eat well,
you shall delight in rich fare. HEAR, O Israel, the commandments of life:
Come to me heedfully, listen, and know prudence!
listen, that you may have life. How is it, Israel,
I will renew with you the everlasting covenant, that you are in the land of your foes,
the benefits assured to David. grown old in a foreign land,
As I made him a witness to the peoples, defiled with the dead,
a leader and commander of nations, accounted with those destined for the netherworld?
so shall you summon a nation you knew not, You have forsaken the fountain of wisdom!
and nations that knew you not shall run to you, Had you walked in the way of God,
because of the LORD, your God, you would have dwelt in enduring peace.
the Holy One of Israel, who has glorified you. Learn where prudence is,
where strength, where understanding;
Seek the LORD while he may be found, that you may know also
call him while he is near. where are length of days, and life,
Let the scoundrel forsake his way, where light of the eyes, and peace.
and the wicked man his thoughts; Who has found the place of wisdom,
let him turn to the LORD for mercy; who has entered into her treasuries?
to our God, who is generous in forgiving.
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, The One who knows all things knows her;
nor are your ways my ways, says the LORD. he has probed her by his knowledge—
As high as the heavens are above the earth, The One who established the earth for all time,
so high are my ways above your ways and filled it with four-footed beasts;
and my thoughts above your thoughts. he who dismisses the light, and it departs,
calls it, and it obeys him trembling;
For just as from the heavens before whom the stars at their posts
the rain and snow come down shine and rejoice;
and do not return there when he calls them, they answer, “Here we are!”
till they have watered the earth, shining with joy for their Maker.
making it fertile and fruitful, Such is our God;
giving seed to the one who sows no other is to be compared to him:
and bread to the one who eats, He has traced out the whole way of understanding,
so shall my word be and has given her to Jacob, his servant,
that goes forth from my mouth; to Israel, his beloved son.
my word shall not return to me void,
but shall do my will, Since then she has appeared on earth,
achieving the end for which I sent it. and moved among people.
She is the book of the precepts of God,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. the law that endures forever;
all who cling to her will live,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Is 12:2-3, 4, 5-6) but those will die who forsake her.
Turn, O Jacob, and receive her:
R. (3) You will draw water joyfully from the springs of salvation. walk by her light toward splendor.
Give not your glory to another,
God indeed is my savior; your privileges to an alien race.
I am confident and unafraid. Blessed are we, O Israel;
My strength and my courage is the LORD, for what pleases God is known to us!
and he has been my savior.
With joy you will draw water The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
at the fountain of salvation.—R.
-5-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 88 ---
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 19:8, 9, 10, 11) you shall be my people, and I will be your God.
R. (John 6:68c) Lord, you have the words of everlasting life. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
The law of the LORD is perfect, RESPONSORIAL PSALM
refreshing the soul;
the decree of the LORD is trustworthy, When baptism is celebrated, responsorial psalm A is used; when baptism
giving wisdom to the simple.—R. is not celebrated, responsorial psalm B or C is used.
The precepts of the LORD are right, A (When baptism is celebrated: Psalm 42:3, 5; 43:3, 4)
rejoicing the heart;
the command of the LORD is clear, R. (42:2) Like a deer that longs for running streams,
enlightening the eye.—R. my soul longs for you, my God.
The fear of the LORD is pure, Athirst is my soul for God, the living God.
enduring forever; When shall I go and behold the face of God?—R.
the ordinances of the LORD are true,
all of them just.—R. I went with the throng
and led them in procession to the house of God,
They are more precious than gold, Amid loud cries of joy and thanksgiving,
than a heap of purest gold; with the multitude keeping festival.—R.
sweeter also than syrup
or honey from the comb.—R. Send forth your light and your fidelity;
they shall lead me on
SEVENTH READING (Ez 36:16-17a, 18-28) And bring me to your holy mountain,
to your dwelling-place.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel:
Then will I go in to the altar of God,
THE word of the LORD came to me, saying: the God of my gladness and joy;
Son of man, when the house of Israel lived in their land, then will I give you thanks upon the harp,
they defiled it by their conduct and deeds. O God, my God!—R.
Therefore I poured out my fury upon them
because of the blood that they poured out on the ground, B (When baptism is not celebrated: Is 12:2-3, 4bcd, 5-6)
and because they defiled it with idols.
I scattered them among the nations, R. (3) You will draw water joyfully from the springs of salvation.
dispersing them over foreign lands;
according to their conduct and deeds I judged them. God indeed is my savior;
But when they came among the nations wherever they came, I am confident and unafraid.
they served to profane my holy name, My strength and my courage is the LORD,
because it was said of them: “These are the people of the LORD, and he has been my savior.
yet they had to leave their land.” With joy you will draw water
So I have relented because of my holy name at the fountain of salvation.—R.
which the house of Israel profaned
among the nations where they came. Give thanks to the LORD, acclaim his name;
Therefore say to the house of Israel: Thus says the Lord GOD: among the nations make known his deeds,
Not for your sakes do I act, house of Israel, proclaim how exalted is his name.—R.
but for the sake of my holy name,
which you profaned among the nations to which you came. Sing praise to the LORD for his glorious achievement;
I will prove the holiness of my great name, profaned among the nations, let this be known throughout all the earth.
in whose midst you have profaned it. Shout with exultation, O city of Zion,
Thus the nations shall know that I am the LORD, says the Lord GOD, for great in your midst
when in their sight I prove my holiness through you. is the Holy One of Israel!—R.
For I will take you away from among the nations,
gather you from all the foreign lands, C (When baptism is not celebrated: Psalm 51:12-13, 14-15, 18-19)
and bring you back to your own land.
I will sprinkle clean water upon you R. (12a) Create a clean heart in me, O God.
to cleanse you from all your impurities,
and from all your idols I will cleanse you. A clean heart create for me, O God,
I will give you a new heart and place a new spirit within you, and a steadfast spirit renew within me.
taking from your bodies your stony hearts Cast me not out from your presence,
and giving you natural hearts. and your Holy spirit take not from me.—R.
I will put my spirit within you and make you live by my statutes,
careful to observe my decrees. Give me back the joy of your salvation,
You shall live in the land I gave your fathers; and a willing spirit sustain in me.
-6-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 89 ---
I will teach transgressors your ways, approached, rolled back the stone, and sat upon it.
and sinners shall return to you.—R. His appearance was like lightning
and his clothing was white as snow.
For you are not pleased with sacrifices; The guards were shaken with fear of him
should I offer a holocaust, you would not accept it. and became like dead men.
My sacrifice, O God, is a contrite spirit; Then the angel said to the women in reply,
a heart contrite and humbled, O God, you will not spurn.—R. “Do not be afraid!
I know that you are seeking Jesus the crucified.
EPISTLE (Rom 7:3-11) He is not here, for he has been raised just as he said.
Come and see the place where he lay.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: Then go quickly and tell his disciples,
‘He has been raised from the dead,
BROTHERS and sisters: and he is going before you to Galilee;
Are you unaware that we who were baptized into Christ Jesus there you will see him.’
were baptized into his death? Behold, I have told you.”
We were indeed buried with him through baptism into death, Then they went away quickly from the tomb,
so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead fearful yet overjoyed,
by the glory of the Father, and ran to announce this to his disciples.
we too might live in newness of life. And behold, Jesus met them on their way and greeted them.
They approached, embraced his feet, and did him homage.
For if we have grown into union with him through a death like his, Then Jesus said to them, “Do not be afraid.
we shall also be united with him in the resurrection. Go tell my brothers to go to Galilee,
We know that our old self was crucified with him, and there they will see me.”
so that our sinful body might be done away with,
that we might no longer be in slavery to sin. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
For a dead person has been absolved from sin.
If, then, we have died with Christ, GOSPEL—B (Mk 16:1-7)
we believe that we shall also live with him.
We know that Christ, raised from the dead, dies no more; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
death no longer has power over him.
As to his death, he died to sin once and for all; WHEN the sabbath was over,
as to his life, he lives for God. Mary Magdalene, Mary, the mother of James, and Salome
Consequently, you too must think of yourselves as being dead to sin bought spices so that they might go and anoint him.
and living for God in Christ Jesus. Very early when the sun had risen,
on the first day of the week, they came to the tomb.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. They were saying to one another,
“Who will roll back the stone for us
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 118:1-2, 16-17, 22-23) from the entrance to the tomb?”
When they looked up,
R. Alleluia, alleluia, alleluia. they saw that the stone had been rolled back;
it was very large.
Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good, On entering the tomb they saw a young man
for his mercy endures forever. sitting on the right side, clothed in a white robe,
Let the house of Israel say, and they were utterly amazed.
“His mercy endures forever.”—R. He said to them, “Do not be amazed!
You seek Jesus of Nazareth, the crucified.
The right hand of the LORD has struck with power; He has been raised; he is not here.
the right hand of the LORD is exalted. Behold the place where they laid him.
I shall not die, but live, But go and tell his disciples and Peter,
and declare the works of the LORD.—R. ‘He is going before you to Galilee;
there you will see him, as he told you.’”
The stone the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
By the LORD has this been done;
it is wonderful in our eyes.—R. GOSPEL—C (Lk 24:1-12)
GOSPEL—A (Mt 28:1-10) + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew: AT daybreak on the first day of the week
the women who had come from Galilee with Jesus
AFTER the sabbath, as the first day of the week was dawning, took the spices they had prepared
Mary Magdalene and the other Mary came to see the tomb. and went to the tomb.
And behold, there was a great earthquake; They found the stone rolled away from the tomb;
for an angel of the Lord descended from heaven, but when they entered,
-7-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 90 ---
they did not find the body of the Lord Jesus.
While they were puzzling over this, behold,
two men in dazzling garments appeared to them.
They were terrified and bowed their faces to the ground.
They said to them,
“Why do you seek the living one among the dead?
He is not here, but he has been raised.
Remember what he said to you while he was still in Galilee,
that the Son of Man must be handed over to sinners
and be crucified, and rise on the third day.”
And they remembered his words.
Then they returned from the tomb
and announced all these things to the eleven
and to all the others.
The women were Mary Magdalene, Joanna, and Mary the mother
of James;
the others who accompanied them also told this to
the apostles,
but their story seemed like nonsense
and they did not believe them.
But Peter got up and ran to the tomb,
bent down, and saw the burial cloths alone;
then he went home amazed at what had happened.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
-8-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 91 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS B (1 Cor 5:6b-8)
EASTER DAY—ABC
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
FIRST READING (Acts 10:34a, 37-43)
Do you not know that a little yeast leavens all the dough?
Clear out the old yeast,
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
so that you may become a fresh batch of dough,
inasmuch as you are unleavened.
PETER proceeded to speak and said:
For our paschal lamb, Christ, has been sacrificed.
“You know what has happened all over Judea,
Therefore, let us celebrate the feast,
beginning in Galilee after the baptism
not with the old yeast, the yeast of malice and wickedness,
that John preached,
but with the unleavened bread of sincerity and truth.
how God anointed Jesus of Nazareth
with the Holy Spirit and power.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
He went about doing good
and healing all those oppressed by the devil,
SEQUENCE Victimae paschali laudes
for God was with him.
We are witnesses of all that he did
Christians, to the Paschal Victim
both in the country of the Jews and in Jerusalem.
Offer your thankful praises!
They put him to death by hanging him on a tree.
A Lamb the sheep redeems;
This man God raised on the third day and granted that he be visible,
Christ, who only is sinless,
not to all the people, but to us,
Reconciles sinners to the Father.
the witnesses chosen by God in advance,
Death and life have contended in that combat stupendous:
who ate and drank with him after he rose from the dead.
The Prince of life, who died, reigns immortal.
He commissioned us to preach to the people
Speak, Mary, declaring
and testify that he is the one appointed by God
What you saw, wayfaring.
as judge of the living and the dead.
“The tomb of Christ, who is living,
To him all the prophets bear witness,
The glory of Jesus’ resurrection;
that everyone who believes in him
bright angels attesting,
The shroud and napkin resting.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Yes, Christ my hope is arisen;
to Galilee he goes before you.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 118:1-2, 16-17, 22-23)
Christ indeed from death is risen, our new life obtaining.
Have mercy, victor King, ever reigning!
R. (24) This is the day the Lord has made; let us rejoice and be glad.
Amen. Alleluia.
or:
R. Alleluia.
ALLELUIA (cf. 1 Corinthians 5:7b-8a)
Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good,
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
for his mercy endures forever.
Let the house of Israel say,
Christ, our paschal lamb, has been sacrificed;
“His mercy endures forever.”—R.
let us then feast with joy in the Lord.—R.
“The right hand of the LORD has struck with power;
GOSPEL (Jn 20:1-9)
the right hand of the LORD is exalted.
I shall not die, but live,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and declare the works of the LORD.—R.
ON the first day of the week,
The stone which the builders rejected
Mary of Magdala came to the tomb early in the morning,
has become the cornerstone.
while it was still dark,
By the LORD has this been done;
and saw the stone removed from the tomb.
it is wonderful in our eyes.—R.
So she ran and went to Simon Peter
and to the other disciple whom Jesus loved, and told them,
SECOND READING
“They have taken the Lord from the tomb,
and we don’t know where they put him.”
A (Col 3:1-4)
So Peter and the other disciple went out and came to the tomb.
They both ran, but the other disciple ran faster than Peter
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Colossians:
and arrived at the tomb first;
he bent down and saw the burial cloths there, but did not go in.
BROTHERS and sisters:
When Simon Peter arrived after him,
If then you were raised with Christ, seek what is above,
he went into the tomb and saw the burial cloths there,
where Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
and the cloth that had covered his head,
Think of what is above, not of what is on earth.
not with the burial cloths but rolled up in a separate place.
For you have died, and your life is hidden with Christ in God.
Then the other disciple also went in,
When Christ your life appears,
the one who had arrived at the tomb first,
then you too will appear with him in glory.
and he saw and believed.
For they did not yet understand the Scripture
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
that he had to rise from the dead.
OR
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 92 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS so that the genuineness of your faith,
SECOND SUNDAY OF EASTER—A more precious than gold that is perishable even though
tested by fire,
may prove to be for praise, glory, and honor
FIRST READING (Acts 2:42-47) at the revelation of Jesus Christ.
Although you have not seen him you love him;
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: even though you do not see him now yet believe in him,
you rejoice with an indescribable and glorious joy,
THEY devoted themselves as you attain the goal of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
to the teaching of the apostles and to the communal life,
to the breaking of bread and to the prayers. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Awe came upon everyone,
and many wonders and signs were done through the apostles. ALLELUIA (John 20:29)
All who believed were together and had all things in common;
they would sell their property and possessions R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and divide them among all according to each one’s need.
Every day they devoted themselves You believe in me, Thomas, because you have seen me,
to meeting together in the temple area says the Lord;
and to breaking bread in their homes. Blessed are they who have not seen me, but still believe!—R.
They ate their meals with exultation and sincerity of heart,
praising God and enjoying favor with all the people. GOSPEL (Jn 20:19-31)
And every day the Lord added to their number those who
were being saved. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. ON the evening of that first day of the week,
when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 118:2-4, 13-15, 22-24) for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in their midst
R. (1) Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good, his love is everlasting. and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
or: When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
R. Alleluia. The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
Let the house of Israel say, As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
“His mercy endures forever.” And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
Let the house of Aaron say, “Receive the Holy Spirit.
“His mercy endures forever.” Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
Let those who fear the LORD say, and whose sins you retain are retained.”
“His mercy endures forever.”—R.
Thomas, called Didymus, one of the Twelve,
I was hard pressed and was falling, was not with them when Jesus came.
but the LORD helped me. So the other disciples said to him, “We have seen the Lord.”
My strength and my courage is the LORD, But he said to them,
and he has been my savior. “Unless I see the mark of the nails in his hands
The joyful shout of victory and put my finger into the nailmarks
in the tents of the just:—R. and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.”
The stone which the builders rejected Now a week later his disciples were again inside
has become the cornerstone. and Thomas was with them.
By the LORD has this been done; Jesus came, although the doors were locked,
it is wonderful in our eyes. and stood in their midst and said, “Peace be with you.”
This is the day the LORD has made; Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here and see my hands,
let us be glad and rejoice in it.—R. and bring your hand and put it into my side,
and do not be unbelieving, but believe.”
SECOND READING (1 Pt 1:3-9) Thomas answered and said to him, “My Lord and my God!”
Jesus said to him, “Have you come to believe because you have seen me?
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Peter: Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.”
BLESSED be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, Now, Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples
who in his great mercy gave us a new birth to a living hope that are not written in this book.
through the resurrection of Jesus Christ from the dead, But these are written that you may come to believe
to an inheritance that is imperishable, undefiled, and unfading, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
kept in heaven for you and that through this belief you may have life in his name.
who by the power of God are safeguarded through faith,
to a salvation that is ready to be revealed in the final time. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
In this you rejoice, although now for a little while
you may have to suffer through various trials,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 93 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS This is the one who came through water and blood, Jesus Christ,
SECOND SUNDAY OF EASTER—B not by water alone, but by water and blood.
The Spirit is the one that testifies,
and the Spirit is truth.
FIRST READING (Acts 4:32-35)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
ALLELUIA (John 20:29)
THE community of believers was of one heart and mind,
and no one claimed that any of his possessions was his own, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
but they had everything in common.
With great power the apostles bore witness You believe in me, Thomas, because you have seen me,
to the resurrection of the Lord Jesus, says the Lord;
and great favor was accorded them all. Blessed are those who have not seen me, but still believe!—R.
There was no needy person among them,
for those who owned property or houses would sell them, GOSPEL (Jn 20:19-31)
bring the proceeds of the sale,
and put them at the feet of the apostles, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and they were distributed to each according to need.
ON the evening of that first day of the week,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
for fear of the Jews,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 118:2-4, 13-15, 22-24) Jesus came and stood in their midst
and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
R. (1) Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good, his love is everlasting. When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
or: The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
R. Alleluia. Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
Let the house of Israel say, And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
“His mercy endures forever.” “Receive the Holy Spirit.
Let the house of Aaron say, Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
“His mercy endures forever.”
Let those who fear the LORD say, Thomas, called Didymus, one of the Twelve,
“His mercy endures forever.”—R. was not with them when Jesus came.
So the other disciples said to him, “We have seen the Lord.”
I was hard pressed and was falling, But he said to them,
but the LORD helped me. “Unless I see the mark of the nails in his hands
My strength and my courage is the LORD, and put my finger into the nailmarks
and he has been my savior. and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.”
The joyful shout of victory
in the tents of the just:—R. Now a week later his disciples were again inside
and Thomas was with them.
The stone which the builders rejected Jesus came, although the doors were locked,
has become the cornerstone. and stood in their midst and said, “Peace be with you.”
By the LORD has this been done; Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here and see my hands,
it is wonderful in our eyes. and bring your hand and put it into my side,
This is the day the LORD has made; and do not be unbelieving, but believe.”
let us be glad and rejoice in it.—R. Thomas answered and said to him, “My Lord and my God!”
Jesus said to him, “Have you come to believe because you have seen me?
SECOND READING (1 Jn 5:1-6) Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.”
A reading from the first Letter of Saint John: Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples
that are not written in this book.
BELOVED: But these are written that you may come to believe
Everyone who believes that Jesus is the Christ is begotten by God, that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
and everyone who loves the Father and that through this belief you may have life in his name.
loves also the one begotten by him.
In this way we know that we love the children of God The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
when we love God and obey his commandments.
For the love of God is this,
that we keep his commandments.
And his commandments are not burdensome,
for whoever is begotten by God conquers the world.
And the victory that conquers the world is our faith.
Who indeed is the victor over the world
but the one who believes that Jesus is the Son of God?
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 94 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS wearing an ankle-length robe, with a gold sash around his chest.
SECOND SUNDAY OF EASTER—C
When I caught sight of him, I fell down at his feet as though dead.
He touched me with his right hand and said, “Do not be afraid.
FIRST READING (Acts 5:12-16) I am the first and the last, the one who lives.
Once I was dead, but now I am alive forever and ever.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: I hold the keys to death and the netherworld.
Write down, therefore, what you have seen,
MANY signs and wonders were done among the people and what is happening, and what will happen afterwards.”
at the hands of the apostles.
They were all together in Solomon’s portico. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
None of the others dared to join them, but the people esteemed them.
Yet more than ever, believers in the Lord, ALLELUIA (John 20:29)
great numbers of men and women, were added to them.
Thus they even carried the sick out into the streets R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and laid them on cots and mats
so that when Peter came by, You believe in me, Thomas, because you have seen me,
at least his shadow might fall on one or another of them. says the Lord;
A large number of people from the towns Blessed are they who have not seen me, but still believe!—R.
in the vicinity of Jerusalem also gathered,
bringing the sick and those disturbed by unclean spirits, GOSPEL (Jn 20:19-31)
and they were all cured.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ON the evening of that first day of the week,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 118:2-4, 13-15, 22-24) when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
for fear of the Jews,
R. (1) Give thanks to the Lord for he is good, his love is everlasting. Jesus came and stood in their midst
or: and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
R. Alleluia. When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
Let the house of Israel say, Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
“His mercy endures forever.” As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
Let the house of Aaron say, And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
“His mercy endures forever.” “Receive the Holy Spirit.
Let those who fear the LORD say, Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
“His mercy endures forever.”—R. and whose sins you retain are retained.”
I was hard pressed and was falling, Thomas, called Didymus, one of the Twelve,
but the LORD helped me. was not with them when Jesus came.
My strength and my courage is the LORD, So the other disciples said to him, “We have seen the Lord.”
and he has been my savior. But he said to them,
The joyful shout of victory “Unless I see the mark of the nails in his hands
in the tents of the just:—R. and put my finger into the nailmarks
and put my hand into his side, I will not believe.”
The stone which the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone. Now a week later his disciples were again inside
By the LORD has this been done; and Thomas was with them.
it is wonderful in our eyes. Jesus came, although the doors were locked,
This is the day the LORD has made; and stood in their midst and said, “Peace be with you.”
let us be glad and rejoice in it.—R. Then he said to Thomas, “Put your finger here and see my hands,
and bring your hand and put it into my side,
SECOND READING (Rev 1:9-11a, 12-13, 17-19) and do not be unbelieving, but believe.”
Thomas answered and said to him, “My Lord and my God!”
A reading from the Book of Revelation: Jesus said to him, “Have you come to believe because you have seen me?
Blessed are those who have not seen and have believed.”
I, JOHN, your brother, who share with you
the distress, the kingdom, and the endurance we have in Jesus, Now Jesus did many other signs in the presence of his disciples
found myself on the island called Patmos that are not written in this book.
because I proclaimed God’s word and gave testimony to Jesus. But these are written that you may come to believe
I was caught up in spirit on the Lord’s day that Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God,
and heard behind me a voice as loud as a trumpet, which said, and that through this belief you may have life in his name.
“Write on a scroll what you see.”
Then I turned to see whose voice it was that spoke to me, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and when I turned, I saw seven gold lampstands
and in the midst of the lampstands one like a son of man,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 95 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS as of a spotless unblemished lamb.
THIRD SUNDAY OF EASTER—A
He was known before the foundation of the world
but revealed in the final time for you,
who through him believe in God
FIRST READING (Acts 2:14, 22-33) who raised him from the dead and gave him glory,
so that your faith and hope are in God.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
THEN Peter stood up with the Eleven,
raised his voice, and proclaimed: ALLELUIA (cf. Luke 24:32)
"You who are Jews, indeed all of you staying in Jerusalem.
Let this be known to you, and listen to my words. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
You who are Israelites, hear these words.
Jesus the Nazarene was a man commended to you by God Lord Jesus, open the Scriptures to us;
with mighty deeds, wonders, and signs, make our hearts burn while you speak to us.—R.
which God worked through him in your midst, as you yourselves know.
This man, delivered up by the set plan and foreknowledge of God, GOSPEL (Lk 24:13-35)
you killed, using lawless men to crucify him.
But God raised him up, releasing him from the throes of death, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
because it was impossible for him to be held by it.
For David says of him: THAT very day, the first day of the week,
‘I saw the Lord ever before me, two of Jesus' disciples were going
with him at my right hand I shall not be disturbed. to a village seven miles from Jerusalem called Emmaus,
Therefore my heart has been glad and my tongue has exulted; and they were conversing about all the things that had occurred.
my flesh, too, will dwell in hope, And it happened that while they were conversing and debating,
because you will not abandon my soul to the netherworld, Jesus himself drew near and walked with them,
nor will you suffer your holy one to see corruption. but their eyes were prevented from recognizing him.
You have made known to me the paths of life; He asked them,
you will fill me with joy in your presence.' "What are you discussing as you walk along?"
They stopped, looking downcast.
"My brothers, one can confidently say to you One of them, named Cleopas, said to him in reply,
about the patriarch David that he died and was buried, "Are you the only visitor to Jerusalem
and his tomb is in our midst to this day. who does not know of the things
But since he was a prophet and knew that God had sworn an oath to him that have taken place there in these days?"
that he would set one of his descendants upon his throne, And he replied to them, "What sort of things?"
he foresaw and spoke of the resurrection of the Christ, They said to him,
that neither was he abandoned to the netherworld "The things that happened to Jesus the Nazarene,
nor did his flesh see corruption. who was a prophet mighty in deed and word
God raised this Jesus; before God and all the people,
of this we are all witnesses. how our chief priests and rulers both handed him over
Exalted at the right hand of God, to a sentence of death and crucified him.
he received the promise of the Holy Spirit from the Father But we were hoping that he would be the one to redeem Israel;
and poured him forth, as you see and hear." and besides all this,
it is now the third day since this took place.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Some women from our group, however, have astounded us:
they were at the tomb early in the morning
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 16:1-2, 5, 7-8, 9-10, 11) and did not find his body;
they came back and reported
R. (11a) Lord, you will show us the path of life. that they had indeed seen a vision of angels
or: who announced that he was alive.
R. Alleluia. Then some of those with us went to the tomb
and found things just as the women had described,
Keep me, O God, for in you I take refuge; but him they did not see."
I say to the LORD, "My LORD are you." And he said to them, "Oh, how foolish you are!
O LORD, my allotted portion and my cup, How slow of heart to believe all that the prophets spoke!
you it is who hold fast my lot.—R. Was it not necessary that the Christ should suffer these things
and enter into his glory?"
I bless the LORD who counsels me; Then beginning with Moses and all the prophets,
even in the night my heart exhorts me. he interpreted to them what referred to him
I set the LORD ever before me; in all the Scriptures.
with him at my right hand I shall not be disturbed.—R. As they approached the village to which they were going,
he gave the impression that he was going on farther.
Therefore my heart is glad and my soul rejoices, But they urged him, "Stay with us,
my body, too, abides in confidence; for it is nearly evening and the day is almost over."
because you will not abandon my soul to the netherworld, So he went in to stay with them.
nor will you suffer your faithful one to undergo corruption.—R. And it happened that, while he was with them at table,
he took bread, said the blessing,
You will show me the path to life, broke it, and gave it to them.
abounding joy in your presence, With that their eyes were opened and they recognized him,
the delights at your right hand forever.—R. but he vanished from their sight.
Then they said to each other,
SECOND READING (1 Pt 1:17-21) "Were not our hearts burning within us
while he spoke to us on the way and opened the Scriptures to us?"
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Peter: So they set out at once and returned to Jerusalem
where they found gathered together
BELOVED: the eleven and those with them who were saying,
If you invoke as Father him who judges impartially "The Lord has truly been raised and has appeared to Simon!"
according to each one's works, Then the two recounted
conduct yourselves with reverence during the time of your sojourning, what had taken place on the way
realizing that you were ransomed from your futile conduct, and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread.
handed on by your ancestors,
not with perishable things like silver or gold The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
but with the precious blood of Christ
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 96 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (cf. Luke 24:32)
THIRD SUNDAY OF EASTER—B
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Acts 3:13-15, 17-19) Lord Jesus, open the Scriptures to us;
make our hearts burn while you speak to us.—R.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
GOSPEL (Lk 24:35-48)
PETER said to the people:
"The God of Abraham, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob,
the God of our fathers, has glorified his servant Jesus, THE two disciples recounted what had taken place on the way,
whom you handed over and denied in Pilate's presence and how Jesus was made known to them
when he had decided to release him. in the breaking of bread.
You denied the Holy and Righteous One
and asked that a murderer be released to you. While they were still speaking about this,
The author of life you put to death, he stood in their midst and said to them,
but God raised him from the dead; of this we are witnesses. "Peace be with you."
Now I know, brothers, But they were startled and terrified
that you acted out of ignorance, just as your leaders did; and thought that they were seeing a ghost.
but God has thus brought to fulfillment Then he said to them, "Why are you troubled?
what he had announced beforehand And why do questions arise in your hearts?
through the mouth of all the prophets, Look at my hands and my feet, that it is I myself.
that his Christ would suffer. Touch me and see, because a ghost does not have flesh and bones
Repent, therefore, and be converted, that your sins may be wiped away." as you can see I have."
And as he said this,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. he showed them his hands and his feet.
While they were still incredulous for joy and were amazed,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 4:2, 4, 7-8, 9) he asked them, "Have you anything here to eat?"
They gave him a piece of baked fish;
R. (7a) Lord, let your face shine on us. he took it and ate it in front of them.
or:
R. Alleluia. He said to them,
"These are my words that I spoke to you while I was still with you,
When I call, answer me, O my just God, that everything written about me in the law of Moses
you who relieve me when I am in distress; and in the prophets and psalms must be fulfilled."
have pity on me, and hear my prayer!—R. Then he opened their minds to understand the Scriptures.
And he said to them,
Know that the LORD does wonders for his faithful one; "Thus it is written that the Christ would suffer
the LORD will hear me when I call upon him.—R. and rise from the dead on the third day
and that repentance, for the forgiveness of sins,
O LORD, let the light of your countenance shine upon us! would be preached in his name
You put gladness into my heart.—R. to all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem.
You are witnesses of these things."
As soon as I lie down, I fall peacefully asleep,
for you alone, O LORD, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
bring security to my dwelling.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Jn 2:1-5a)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint John:
MY children, I am writing this to you
so that you may not commit sin.
But if anyone does sin, we have an Advocate with the Father,
Jesus Christ the righteous one.
He is expiation for our sins,
and not for our sins only but for those of the whole world.
The way we may be sure that we know him is to keep
his commandments.
Those who say, "I know him, " but do not keep his commandments
are liars, and the truth is not in them.
But whoever keeps his word,
the love of God is truly perfected in him.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 97 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA
THIRD SUNDAY OF EASTER—C
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Christ is risen, creator of all;
FIRST READING (Acts 5:27-32, 40b-41) he has shown pity on all people.—R.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: GOSPEL (Jn 21:1-19 or 21:1-14)
WHEN the captain and the court officers had brought the apostles in + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and made them stand before the Sanhedrin,
the high priest questioned them, [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
"We gave you strict orders, did we not,
to stop teaching in that name? [ AT that time, Jesus revealed himself again to his disciples at
Yet you have filled Jerusalem with your teaching the Sea of Tiberias.
and want to bring this man's blood upon us." He revealed himself in this way.
But Peter and the apostles said in reply, Together were Simon Peter, Thomas called Didymus,
"We must obey God rather than men. Nathanael from Cana in Galilee,
The God of our ancestors raised Jesus, Zebedee's sons, and two others of his disciples.
though you had him killed by hanging him on a tree. Simon Peter said to them, "I am going fishing."
God exalted him at his right hand as leader and savior They said to him, "We also will come with you."
to grant Israel repentance and forgiveness of sins. So they went out and got into the boat,
We are witnesses of these things, but that night they caught nothing.
as is the Holy Spirit whom God has given to those who obey him." When it was already dawn, Jesus was standing on the shore;
but the disciples did not realize that it was Jesus.
The Sanhedrin ordered the apostles Jesus said to them, "Children, have you caught anything to eat?"
to stop speaking in the name of Jesus, and dismissed them. They answered him, "No."
So they left the presence of the Sanhedrin, So he said to them, "Cast the net over the right side of the boat
rejoicing that they had been found worthy and you will find something."
to suffer dishonor for the sake of the name. So they cast it, and were not able to pull it in
because of the number of fish.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. So the disciple whom Jesus loved said to Peter, "It is the Lord."
When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Ps 30:2, 4, 5-6, 11-12, 13) he tucked in his garment, for he was lightly clad,
and jumped into the sea.
R. (2a) I will praise you, Lord, for you have rescued me. The other disciples came in the boat,
or: for they were not far from shore, only about a hundred yards,
R. Alleluia. dragging the net with the fish.
When they climbed out on shore,
I will extol you, O LORD, for you drew me clear they saw a charcoal fire with fish on it and bread.
and did not let my enemies rejoice over me. Jesus said to them, "Bring some of the fish you just caught."
O LORD, you brought me up from the netherworld; So Simon Peter went over and dragged the net ashore
you preserved me from among those going down into the pit.—R. full of one hundred fifty-three large fish.
Even though there were so many, the net was not torn.
Sing praise to the LORD, you his faithful ones, Jesus said to them, "Come, have breakfast."
and give thanks to his holy name. And none of the disciples dared to ask him, "Who are you?"
For his anger lasts but a moment; because they realized it was the Lord.
a lifetime, his good will. Jesus came over and took the bread and gave it to them,
At nightfall, weeping enters in, and in like manner the fish.
but with the dawn, rejoicing.—R. This was now the third time Jesus was revealed to his disciples
after being raised from the dead. ]
Hear, O LORD, and have pity on me;
O LORD, be my helper. When they had finished breakfast, Jesus said to Simon Peter,
You changed my mourning into dancing; "Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these?"
O LORD, my God, forever will I give you thanks.—R. Simon Peter answered him, "Yes, Lord, you know that I love you."
Jesus said to him, "Feed my lambs."
SECOND READING (Rev 5:11-14) He then said to Simon Peter a second time,
"Simon, son of John, do you love me?"
A reading from the Book of Revelation: Simon Peter answered him, "Yes, Lord, you know that I love you."
Jesus said to him, "Tend my sheep."
I, JOHN, looked and heard the voices of many angels Jesus said to him the third time,
who surrounded the throne "Simon, son of John, do you love me?"
and the living creatures and the elders. Peter was distressed that Jesus had said to him a third time,
They were countless in number, and they cried out in a loud voice: "Do you love me?" and he said to him,
"Worthy is the Lamb that was slain "Lord, you know everything; you know that I love you."
to receive power and riches, wisdom and strength, Jesus said to him, "Feed my sheep.
honor and glory and blessing." Amen, amen, I say to you, when you were younger,
Then I heard every creature in heaven and on earth you used to dress yourself and go where you wanted;
and under the earth and in the sea, but when you grow old, you will stretch out your hands,
everything in the universe, cry out: and someone else will dress you
"To the one who sits on the throne and to the Lamb and lead you where you do not want to go."
be blessing and honor, glory and might, He said this signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God.
forever and ever." And when he had said this, he said to him, "Follow me."
The four living creatures answered, "Amen, "
and the elders fell down and worshiped. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 98 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS For to this you have been called,
FOURTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—A because Christ also suffered for you,
leaving you an example that you should follow in his footsteps.
He committed no sin, and no deceit was found in his mouth.
FIRST READING (Acts 2:14a, 36-41)
When he was insulted, he returned no insult;
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: when he suffered, he did not threaten;
instead, he handed himself over to the one who judges justly.
THEN Peter stood up with the Eleven, He himself bore our sins in his body upon the cross,
raised his voice, and proclaimed: so that, free from sin, we might live for righteousness.
“Let the whole house of Israel know for certain By his wounds you have been healed.
that God has made both Lord and Christ, For you had gone astray like sheep,
this Jesus whom you crucified.” but you have now returned to the shepherd and guardian of your
souls.
Now when they heard this, they were cut to the heart,
and they asked Peter and the other apostles, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
“What are we to do, my brothers?”
Peter said to them, ALLELUIA (John 10:14)
“Repent and be baptized, every one of you,
in the name of Jesus Christ for the forgiveness of your sins; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and you will receive the gift of the Holy Spirit.
For the promise is made to you and to your children I am the good shepherd, says the Lord;
and to all those far off, I know my sheep, and mine know me.—R.
whomever the Lord our God will call.”
He testified with many other arguments, and was exhorting them, GOSPEL (Jn 10:1-10)
“Save yourselves from this corrupt generation.”
Those who accepted his message were baptized, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and about three thousand persons were added that day.
JESUS said:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. “Amen, amen, I say to you,
whoever does not enter a sheepfold through the gate
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 23: 13a, 3b4, 5, 6) but climbs over elsewhere is a thief and a robber.
But whoever enters through the gate is the shepherd of the sheep.
R. (1) The Lord is my shepherd; there is nothing I shall want. The gatekeeper opens it for him, and the sheep hear his voice,
or: as the shepherd calls his own sheep by name and leads them out.
R. Alleluia. When he has driven out all his own,
he walks ahead of them, and the sheep follow him,
The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want. because they recognize his voice.
In verdant pastures he gives me repose; But they will not follow a stranger;
beside restful waters he leads me; they will run away from him,
he refreshes my soul.—R. because they do not recognize the voice of strangers.”
Although Jesus used this figure of speech,
He guides me in right paths the Pharisees did not realize what he was trying to tell them.
for his name’s sake.
Even though I walk in the dark valley So Jesus said again, “Amen, amen, I say to you,
I fear no evil; for you are at my side. I am the gate for the sheep.
With your rod and your staff All who came before me are thieves and robbers,
that give me courage.—R. but the sheep did not listen to them.
I am the gate.
You spread the table before me Whoever enters through me will be saved,
in the sight of my foes; and will come in and go out and find pasture.
you anoint my head with oil; A thief comes only to steal and slaughter and destroy;
my cup overflows.—R. I came so that they might have life and have it more abundantly.”
Only goodness and kindness follow me The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
all the days of my life;
and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD
for years to come.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Pt 2:20b-25)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Peter:
BELOVED:
If you are patient when you suffer for doing what is good,
this is a grace before God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 99 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FOURTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—B
ALLELUIA (John 10:14)
FIRST READING (Acts 4:8-12) R. Alleluia, alleluia.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: I am the good shepherd, says the Lord;
I know my sheep, and mine know me.—R.
PETER, filled with the Holy Spirit, said:
“Leaders of the people and elders: GOSPEL (Jn 10:11-18)
If we are being examined today
about a good deed done to a cripple, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
namely, by what means he was saved,
then all of you and all the people of Israel should know JESUS said:
that it was in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazarene “I am the good shepherd.
whom you crucified, whom God raised from the dead; A good shepherd lays down his life for the sheep.
in his name this man stands before you healed. A hired man, who is not a shepherd
He is the stone rejected by you, the builders, and whose sheep are not his own,
which has become the cornerstone. sees a wolf coming and leaves the sheep and runs away,
There is no salvation through anyone else, and the wolf catches and scatters them.
nor is there any other name under heaven This is because he works for pay and has no concern for the sheep.
given to the human race by which we are to be saved.” I am the good shepherd,
and I know mine and mine know me,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. just as the Father knows me and I know the Father;
and I will lay down my life for the sheep.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 118:1, 8-9, 21-23, 26, 28, 29) I have other sheep that do not belong to this fold.
These also I must lead, and they will hear my voice,
R. (22) The stone rejected by the builders has become the cornerstone. and there will be one flock, one shepherd.
or: This is why the Father loves me,
R. Alleluia. because I lay down my life in order to take it up again.
No one takes it from me, but I lay it down on my own.
Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good, I have power to lay it down, and power to take it up again.
for his mercy endures forever. This command I have received from my Father.”
It is better to take refuge in the LORD
than to trust in man. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
It is better to take refuge in the LORD
than to trust in princes.—R.
I will give thanks to you, for you have answered me
and have been my savior.
The stone which the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone.
By the LORD has this been done;
it is wonderful in our eyes.—R.
Blessed is he who comes in the name of the LORD;
we bless you from the house of the LORD.
I will give thanks to you, for you have answered me
and have been my savior.
Give thanks to the LORD, for he is good;
for his kindness endures forever.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Jn 3:1-2)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint John:
BELOVED:
See what love the Father has bestowed on us
that we may be called the children of God.
Yet so we are.
The reason the world does not know us
is that it did not know him.
Beloved, we are God’s children now;
what we shall be has not yet been revealed.
We do know that when it is revealed we shall be like him,
for we shall see him as he is.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 100 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS I, JOHN, had a vision of a great multitude,
FOURTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—C which no one could count,
from every nation, race, people, and tongue.
They stood before the throne and before the Lamb,
FIRST READING (Acts 13:14, 43-52) wearing white robes and holding palm branches in their hands.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: Then one of the elders said to me,
"These are the ones who have survived the time of great distress;
PAUL and Barnabas continued on from Perga they have washed their robes
and reached Antiochin Pisidia. and made them white in the blood of the Lamb.
On the sabbath they entered the synagogue and took their seats.
Many Jews and worshipers who were converts to Judaism "For this reason they stand before God's throne
followed Paul and Barnabas, who spoke to them and worship him day and night in his temple.
and urged them to remain faithful to the grace of God. The one who sits on the throne will shelter them.
They will not hunger or thirst anymore,
On the following sabbath almost the whole city gathered nor will the sun or any heat strike them.
to hear the word of the Lord. For the Lamb who is in the center of the throne
When the Jews saw the crowds, they were filled with jealousy will shepherd them
and with violent abuse contradicted what Paul said. and lead them to springs of life-giving water,
Both Paul and Barnabas spoke out boldly and said, and God will wipe away every tear from their eyes."
"It was necessary that the word of God be spoken to you first,
but since you reject it The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and condemn yourselves as unworthy of eternal life,
we now turn to the Gentiles. ALLELUIA (Jn 10:14)
For so the Lord has commanded us,
I have made you a light to the Gentiles, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
that you may be an instrument of salvation
to the ends of the earth." I am the good shepherd, says the Lord;
I know my sheep, and mine know me.—R.
The Gentiles were delighted when they heard this
and glorified the word of the Lord. GOSPEL (Jn 10:27-30)
All who were destined for eternal life came to believe,
and the word of the Lord continued to spread + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
through the whole region.
The Jews, however, incited the women of prominence who were JESUS said:
worshipers "My sheep hear my voice;
and the leading men of the city, I know them, and they follow me.
stirred up a persecution against Paul and Barnabas, I give them eternal life, and they shall never perish.
and expelled them from their territory. No one can take them out of my hand.
So they shook the dust from their feet in protest against them, My Father, who has given them to me, is greater than all,
and went to Iconium. and no one can take them out of the Father's hand.
The disciples were filled with joy and the Holy Spirit. The Father and I are one."
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Ps 100:1-2, 3, 5)
R. (3c) We are his people, the sheep of his flock.
or:
R. Alleluia.
Sing joyfully to the LORD, all you lands;
serve the LORD with gladness;
come before him with joyful song.—R.
Know that the LORD is God;
he made us, his we are;
his people, the flock he tends.—R.
The LORD is good:
his kindness endures forever,
and his faithfulness, to all generations.—R.
SECOND READING (Rev 7:9, 14b-17)
A reading from the Book of Revelation:
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 101 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and whoever believes in it shall not be put to shame.
FIFTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—A Therefore, its value is for you who have faith, but for those without faith:
The stone that the builders rejected
has become the cornerstone, and
FIRST READING (Acts 6:1-7) A stone that will make people stumble,
and a rock that will make them fall.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: They stumble by disobeying the word, as is their destiny.
You are “a chosen race, a royal priesthood,
AS the number of disciples continued to grow, a holy nation, a people of his own,
the Hellenists complained against the Hebrews so that you may announce the praises” of him
because their widows who called you out of darkness into his wonderful light.
were being neglected in the daily distribution.
So the Twelve called together the community of the disciples and said, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
“It is not right for us to neglect the word of God to serve at table.
Brothers, select from among you seven reputable men, ALLELUIA (John 14:6)
filled with the Spirit and wisdom,
whom we shall appoint to this task, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
whereas we shall devote ourselves to prayer
and to the ministry of the word.” I am the way, the truth and the life, says the Lord;
The proposal was acceptable to the whole community, no one comes to the Father, except through me.—R.
so they chose Stephen, a man filled with faith and the Holy Spirit,
also Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, GOSPEL (Jn 14:1-12)
and Nicholas of Antioch, a convert to Judaism.
They presented these men to the apostles + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
who prayed and laid hands on them.
The word of God continued to spread, JESUS said to his disciples:
and the number of the disciples in Jerusalem increased greatly; “Do not let your hearts be troubled.
even a large group of priests were becoming obedient to the faith. You have faith in God; have faith also in me.
In my Father’s house there are many dwelling places.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. If there were not,
would I have told you that I am going to prepare a place for you?
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 33:1-2, 4-5, 18-19) And if I go and prepare a place for you,
I will come back again and take you to myself,
R. (22) Lord, let your mercy be on us, as we place our trust in you. so that where I am you also may be.
or: Where I am going you know the way.”
R. Alleluia. Thomas said to him,
“Master, we do not know where you are going;
Exult, you just, in the LORD; how can we know the way?”
praise from the upright is fitting. Jesus said to him, “I am the way and the truth and the life.
Give thanks to the LORD on the harp; No one comes to the Father except through me.
with the ten-stringed lyre chant his praises.—R. If you know me, then you will also know my Father.
From now on you do know him and have seen him.”
Upright is the word of the LORD, Philip said to him,
and all his works are trustworthy. “Master, show us the Father, and that will be enough for us.”
He loves justice and right; Jesus said to him, “Have I been with you for so long a time
of the kindness of the LORD the earth is full.—R. and you still do not know me, Philip?
Whoever has seen me has seen the Father.
See, the eyes of the LORD are upon those who fear him, How can you say, ‘Show us the Father’?
upon those who hope for his kindness, Do you not believe that I am in the Father and the Father is in me?
To deliver them from death The words that I speak to you I do not speak on my own.
and preserve them in spite of famine.—R. The Father who dwells in me is doing his works.
Believe me that I am in the Father and the Father is in me,
SECOND READING (1 Pt 2:4-9) or else, believe because of the works themselves.
Amen, amen, I say to you,
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Peter: whoever believes in me will do the works that I do,
and will do greater ones than these,
BELOVED: because I am going to the Father.”
Come to him, a living stone, rejected by human beings
but chosen and precious in the sight of God, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and, like living stones,
let yourselves be built into a spiritual house
to be a holy priesthood to offer spiritual sacrifices
acceptable to God through Jesus Christ.
For it says in Scripture:
Behold, I am laying a stone in Zion,
a cornerstone, chosen and precious,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 102 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS we have confidence in God
FIFTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—B and receive from him whatever we ask,
because we keep his commandments and do what pleases him.
And his commandment is this:
FIRST READING (Acts 9:26-31) we should believe in the name of his Son, Jesus Christ,
and love one another just as he commanded us.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: Those who keep his commandments remain in him, and he in them,
and the way we know that he remains in us
WHEN Saul arrived in Jerusalem he tried to join the disciples, is from the Spirit he gave us.
but they were all afraid of him,
not believing that he was a disciple. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Then Barnabas took charge of him and brought him to the apostles,
and he reported to them how he had seen the Lord, ALLELUIA (John 15:4a, 5b)
and that he had spoken to him,
and how in Damascus he had spoken out boldly in the name of Jesus. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
He moved about freely with them in Jerusalem,
and spoke out boldly in the name of the Lord. Remain in me as I remain in you, says the Lord.
He also spoke and debated with the Hellenists, Whoever remains in me will bear much fruit.—R.
but they tried to kill him.
And when the brothers learned of this, GOSPEL (Jn 15:1-8)
they took him down to Caesarea
and sent him on his way to Tarsus. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
The church throughout all Judea, Galilee, and Samaria was at peace.
It was being built up and walked in the fear of the Lord, JESUS said to his disciples:
and with the consolation of the Holy Spirit it grew in numbers. “I am the true vine, and my Father is the vine grower.
He takes away every branch in me that does not bear fruit,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and every one that does he prunes so that it bears more fruit.
You are already pruned because of the word that I spoke to you.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 22:26-27, 28, 30, 31-32) Remain in me, as I remain in you.
Just as a branch cannot bear fruit on its own
R. (26a) I will praise you, Lord, in the assembly of your people. unless it remains on the vine,
or: so neither can you unless you remain in me.
R. Alleluia. I am the vine, you are the branches.
Whoever remains in me and I in him will bear much fruit,
I will fulfill my vows before those who fear the LORD. because without me you can do nothing.
The lowly shall eat their fill; Anyone who does not remain in me
they who seek the LORD shall praise him: will be thrown out like a branch and wither;
“May your hearts live forever!”—R. people will gather them and throw them into a fire
and they will be burned.
All the ends of the earth If you remain in me and my words remain in you,
shall remember and turn to the LORD; ask for whatever you want and it will be done for you.
all the families of the nations By this is my Father glorified,
shall bow down before him.—R. that you bear much fruit and become my disciples.”
To him alone shall bow down The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
all who sleep in the earth;
before him shall bend
all who go down into the dust.—R.
And to him my soul shall live;
my descendants shall serve him.
Let the coming generation be told of the LORD
that they may proclaim to a people yet to be born
the justice he has shown.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Jn 3:18-24)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint John:
CHILDREN, let us love not in word or speech
but in deed and truth.
Now this is how we shall know that we belong to the truth
and reassure our hearts before him
in whatever our hearts condemn,
for God is greater than our hearts and knows everything.
Beloved, if our hearts do not condemn us,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 103 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and there shall be no more death or mourning, wailing or pain,
FIFTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—C for the old order has passed away.”
The One who sat on the throne said,
FIRST READING (Acts 14:21-27) “Behold, I make all things new.”
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
AFTER Paul and Barnabas had proclaimed the good news ALLELUIA (John 13:34)
to that city
and made a considerable number of disciples, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
they returned to Lystra and to Iconium and to Antioch.
They strengthened the spirits of the disciples I give you a new commandment, says the Lord:
and exhorted them to persevere in the faith, saying, love one another as I have loved you.—R.
“It is necessary for us to undergo many hardships
to enter the kingdom of God.” GOSPEL (Jn 13:31-33a, 34-35)
They appointed elders for them in each church and,
with prayer and fasting, commended them to the Lord + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
in whom they had put their faith.
Then they traveled through Pisidia and reached Pamphylia. WHEN Judas had left them, Jesus said,
After proclaiming the word at Perga they went down to Attalia. “Now is the Son of Man glorified, and God is glorified in him.
From there they sailed to Antioch, If God is glorified in him,
where they had been commended to the grace of God God will also glorify him in himself,
for the work they had now accomplished. and God will glorify him at once.
And when they arrived, they called the church together My children, I will be with you only a little while longer.
and reported what God had done with them I give you a new commandment: love one another.
and how he had opened the door of faith to the Gentiles. As I have loved you, so you also should love one another.
This is how all will know that you are my disciples,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. if you have love for one another.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 145:8-9, 10-11, 12-13) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
R. (cf. 1) I will praise your name for ever, my king and my God.
or:
R. Alleluia.
The LORD is gracious and merciful,
slow to anger and of great kindness.
The LORD is good to all
and compassionate toward all his works.—R.
Let all your works give you thanks, O LORD,
and let your faithful ones bless you.
Let them discourse of the glory of your kingdom
and speak of your might.—R.
Let them make known your might to the children of Adam,
and the glorious splendor of your kingdom.
Your kingdom is a kingdom for all ages,
and your dominion endures through all generations.—R.
SECOND READING (Rev 21:1-5a)
A reading from the Book of Revelation:
THEN I, John, saw a new heaven and a new earth.
The former heaven and the former earth had passed away,
and the sea was no more.
I also saw the holy city, a new Jerusalem,
coming down out of heaven from God,
prepared as a bride adorned for her husband.
I heard a loud voice from the throne saying,
“Behold, God’s dwelling is with the human race.
He will dwell with them and they will be his people
and God himself will always be with them as their God.
He will wipe every tear from their eyes,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 104 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS those who defame your good conduct in Christ
SIXTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—A may themselves be put to shame.
For it is better to suffer for doing good,
if that be the will of God, than for doing evil.
FIRST READING (Acts 8:5-8, 14-17)
For Christ also suffered for sins once,
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: the righteous for the sake of the unrighteous,
that he might lead you to God.
PHILIP went down to the city of Samaria Put to death in the flesh,
and proclaimed the Christ to them. he was brought to life in the Spirit.
With one accord, the crowds paid attention to what was said by Philip
when they heard it and saw the signs he was doing. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
For unclean spirits, crying out in a loud voice,
came out of many possessed people, ALLELUIA (John 14:23)
and many paralyzed or crippled people were cured.
There was great joy in that city. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Now when the apostles in Jerusalem Whoever loves me will keep my word, says the Lord,
heard that Samaria had accepted the word of God, and my Father will love him and we will come to him.—R.
they sent them Peter and John,
who went down and prayed for them, GOSPEL (Jn 14:15-21)
that they might receive the Holy Spirit,
for it had not yet fallen upon any of them; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
they had only been baptized in the name of the Lord Jesus.
Then they laid hands on them JESUS said to his disciples:
and they received the Holy Spirit. "If you love me, you will keep my commandments.
And I will ask the Father,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and he will give you another Advocate to be with you always,
the Spirit of truth, whom the world cannot accept,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 66:1-3, 4-5, 6-7, 16, 20) because it neither sees nor knows him.
But you know him, because he remains with you,
R. (1) Let all the earth cry out to God with joy. and will be in you.
or: I will not leave you orphans; I will come to you.
R. Alleluia. In a little while the world will no longer see me,
but you will see me, because I live and you will live.
Shout joyfully to God, all the earth, On that day you will realize that I am in my Father
sing praise to the glory of his name; and you are in me and I in you.
proclaim his glorious praise. Whoever has my commandments and observes them
Say to God, "How tremendous are your deeds!—R. is the one who loves me.
And whoever loves me will be loved by my Father,
Let all on earth worship and sing praise to you, and I will love him and reveal myself to him."
sing praise to your name!"
Come and see the works of God, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
his tremendous deeds among the children of Adam.—R.
He has changed the sea into dry land;
through the river they passed on foot;
therefore let us rejoice in him.
He rules by his might forever.—R.
Hear now, all you who fear God, while I declare
what he has done for me.
Blessed be God who refused me not
my prayer or his kindness!—R.
SECOND READING (1 Pt 3:15-18)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Peter:
BELOVED:
Sanctify Christ as Lord in your hearts.
Always be ready to give an explanation
to anyone who asks you for a reason for your hope,
but do it with gentleness and reverence,
keeping your conscience clear,
so that, when you are maligned,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 105 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
SIXTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—B
ALLELUIA (John 14:23)
FIRST READING (Acts 10:25-26, 34-35, 44-48) R. Alleluia, alleluia.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: Whoever loves me will keep my word, says the Lord,
and my Father will love him and we will come to him.—R.
WHEN Peter entered, Cornelius met him
and, falling at his feet, paid him homage. GOSPEL (Jn 15:9-17)
Peter, however, raised him up, saying,
"Get up. I myself am also a human being." + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
Then Peter proceeded to speak and said, JESUS said to his disciples:
"In truth, I see that God shows no partiality. "As the Father loves me, so I also love you.
Rather, in every nation whoever fears him and acts uprightly Remain in my love.
is acceptable to him." If you keep my commandments, you will remain in my love,
just as I have kept my Father's commandments
While Peter was still speaking these things, and remain in his love.
the Holy Spirit fell upon all who were listening to the word.
The circumcised believers who had accompanied Peter "I have told you this so that my joy may be in you
were astounded that the gift of the Holy Spirit and your joy might be complete.
should have been poured out on the Gentiles also, This is my commandment: love one another as I love you.
for they could hear them speaking in tongues and glorifying God. No one has greater love than this,
Then Peter responded, to lay down one's life for one's friends.
"Can anyone withhold the water for baptizing these people, You are my friends if you do what I command you.
who have received the Holy Spirit even as we have?" I no longer call you slaves,
He ordered them to be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. because a slave does not know what his master is doing.
I have called you friends,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. because I have told you everything I have heard from my Father.
It was not you who chose me, but I who chose you
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 98:1, 2-3, 3-4) and appointed you to go and bear fruit that will remain,
so that whatever you ask the Father in my name he may give you.
R. (cf. 2b) The Lord has revealed to the nations his saving power. This I command you: love one another."
or:
R. Alleluia. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Sing to the LORD a new song,
for he has done wondrous deeds;
His right hand has won victory for him,
his holy arm.—R.
The LORD has made his salvation known:
in the sight of the nations he has revealed his justice.
He has remembered his kindness and his faithfulness
toward the house of Israel.—R.
All the ends of the earth have seen
the salvation by our God.
Sing joyfully to the LORD, all you lands;
break into song; sing praise.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Jn 4:7-10)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint John:
BELOVED, let us love one another,
because love is of God;
everyone who loves is begotten by God and knows God.
Whoever is without love does not know God, for God is love.
In this way the love of God was revealed to us:
God sent his only Son into the world
so that we might have life through him.
In this is love:
not that we have loved God, but that he loved us
and sent his Son as expiation for our sins.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 106 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (Rev 21:10-14, 22-23)
SIXTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—C
A reading from the Book of Revelation:
FIRST READING (Acts 15:1-2, 22-29) THE angel took me in spirit to a great, high mountain
and showed me the holy city Jerusalem
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: coming down out of heaven from God.
It gleamed with the splendor of God.
SOME who had come down from Judea were instructing the brothers, Its radiance was like that of a precious stone,
"Unless you are circumcised according to the Mosaic practice, like jasper, clear as crystal.
you cannot be saved." It had a massive, high wall,
Because there arose no little dissension and debate with twelve gates where twelve angels were stationed
by Paul and Barnabas with them, and on which names were inscribed,
it was decided that Paul, Barnabas, and some of the others the names of the twelve tribes of the Israelites.
should go up to Jerusalem to the apostles and elders There were three gates facing east,
about this question. three north, three south, and three west.
The wall of the city had twelve courses of stones as its foundation,
The apostles and elders, in agreement with the whole church, on which were inscribed the twelve names
decided to choose representatives of the twelve apostles of the Lamb.
and to send them to Antioch with Paul and Barnabas.
The ones chosen were Judas, who was called Barsabbas, I saw no temple in the city
and Silas, leaders among the brothers. for its temple is the Lord God almighty and the Lamb.
This is the letter delivered by them: The city had no need of sun or moon to shine on it,
for the glory of God gave it light,
"The apostles and the elders, your brothers, and its lamp was the Lamb.
to the brothers in Antioch, Syria, and Cilicia
of Gentile origin: greetings. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Since we have heard that some of our number
who went out without any mandate from us ALLELUIA (John 14:23)
have upset you with their teachings
and disturbed your peace of mind, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
we have with one accord decided to choose representatives
and to send them to you along with our beloved Barnabas and Paul, Whoever loves me will keep my word, says the Lord,
who have dedicated their lives to the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. and my Father will love him and we will come to him.—R.
So we are sending Judas and Silas
who will also convey this same message by word of mouth: GOSPEL (Jn 14:23-29)
‘It is the decision of the Holy Spirit and of us
not to place on you any burden beyond these necessities, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
namely, to abstain from meat sacrificed to idols,
from blood, from meats of strangled animals, JESUS said to his disciples:
and from unlawful marriage. "Whoever loves me will keep my word,
If you keep free of these, and my Father will love him,
you will be doing what is right. Farewell.'" and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him.
Whoever does not love me does not keep my words;
The word of the Lord.—Thanks be to God. yet the word you hear is not mine
but that of the Father who sent me.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 67:2-3, 5, 6, 8)
"I have told you this while I am with you.
R. (4) O God, let all the nations praise you! The Advocate, the Holy Spirit,
or: whom the Father will send in my name,
R. Alleluia. will teach you everything
and remind you of all that I told you.
May God have pity on us and bless us; Peace I leave with you; my peace I give to you.
may he let his face shine upon us. Not as the world gives do I give it to you.
So may your way be known upon earth; Do not let your hearts be troubled or afraid.
among all nations, your salvation.—R. You heard me tell you,
‘I am going away and I will come back to you.'
May the nations be glad and exult If you loved me,
because you rule the peoples in equity; you would rejoice that I am going to the Father;
the nations on the earth you guide.—R. for the Father is greater than I.
And now I have told you this before it happens,
May the peoples praise you, O God; so that when it happens you may believe."
may all the peoples praise you!
May God bless us, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and may all the ends of the earth fear him!—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 107 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (Eph 1:17-23)
THE ASCENSION OF THE LORD—A
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
FIRST READING (Acts 1:1-11) BROTHERS and sisters:
May the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory,
A reading from the beginning of the Acts of the Apostles: give you a Spirit of wisdom and revelation
resulting in knowledge of him.
IN the first book, Theophilus, May the eyes of your hearts be enlightened,
I dealt with all that Jesus did and taught that you may know what is the hope that belongs to his call,
until the day he was taken up, what are the riches of glory
after giving instructions through the Holy Spirit in his inheritance among the holy ones,
to the apostles whom he had chosen. and what is the surpassing greatness of his power
He presented himself alive to them for us who believe,
by many proofs after he had suffered, in accord with the exercise of his great might,
appearing to them during forty days which he worked in Christ,
and speaking about the kingdom of God. raising him from the dead
While meeting with the them, and seating him at his right hand in the heavens,
he enjoined them not to depart from Jerusalem, far above every principality, authority, power, and dominion,
but to wait for “the promise of the Father and every name that is named
about which you have heard me speak; not only in this age but also in the one to come.
for John baptized with water, And he put all things beneath his feet
but in a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.” and gave him as head over all things to the church,
which is his body,
When they had gathered together they asked him, the fullness of the one who fills all things in every way.
“Lord, are you at this time going to restore
the kingdom to Israel?” The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
He answered them, “It is not for you to know the times or seasons
that the Father has established by his own authority. ALLELUIA (Matthew 28:19a, 20b)
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you,
and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
throughout Judea and Samaria,
and to the ends of the earth.” Go and teach all nations, says the Lord;
When he had said this, as they were looking on, I am with you always, until the end of the world.—R.
he was lifted up, and a cloud took him from their sight.
While they were looking intently at the sky as he was going, GOSPEL (Mt 28:16-20)
suddenly two men dressed in white garments stood beside them.
They said, “Men of Galilee, + The conclusion of the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
why are you standing there looking at the sky?
This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven THE eleven disciples went to Galilee,
will return in the same way as you have seen him going into heaven.” to the mountain to which Jesus had ordered them.
When they saw him, they worshiped, but they doubted.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Then Jesus approached and said to them,
“All power in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 47:2-3, 6-7, 8-9) Go, therefore, and make disciples of all nations,
baptizing them in the name of the Father,
R. (6) God mounts his throne to shouts of joy: a blare of trumpets for the and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
Lord. teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you.
or: And behold, I am with you always, until the end of the age.”
R. Alleluia.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
All you peoples, clap your hands,
shout to God with cries of gladness,
For the LORD, the Most High, the awesome,
is the great king over all the earth.—R.
God mounts his throne amid shouts of joy;
the LORD, amid trumpet blasts.
Sing praise to God, sing praise;
sing praise to our king, sing praise.—R.
For king of all the earth is God;
sing hymns of praise.
God reigns over the nations,
God sits upon his holy throne.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 108 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and seating him at his right hand in the heavens,
far above every principality, authority, power, and dominion,
THE ASCENSION OF THE LORD—B
and every name that is named
not only in this age but also in the one to come.
And he put all things beneath his feet
FIRST READING (Acts 1:1-11) and gave him as head over all things to the church,
which is his body,
A reading from the beginning of the Acts of the Apostles: the fullness of the one who fills all things in every way.
IN the first book, Theophilus, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
I dealt with all that Jesus did and taught
until the day he was taken up, OR
after giving instructions through the Holy Spirit
to the apostles whom he had chosen. B (Eph 4:1-13 or 4:1-7, 11-13)
He presented himself alive to them
by many proofs after he had suffered, A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
appearing to them during forty days
and speaking about the kingdom of God. [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
While meeting with them,
he enjoined them not to depart from Jerusalem, [ BROTHERS and sisters,
but to wait for “the promise of the Father I, a prisoner for the Lord,
about which you have heard me speak; urge you to live in a manner worthy of the call
for John baptized with water, you have received,
but in a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.” with all humility and gentleness, with patience,
bearing with one another through love,
When they had gathered together they asked him, striving to preserve the unity of the spirit
“Lord, are you at this time going to restore through the bond of peace:
the kingdom to Israel?” one body and one Spirit,
He answered them, “It is not for you to know the times or seasons as you were also called to the one hope of your call;
that the Father has established by his own authority. one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you, one God and Father of all,
and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, who is over all and through all and in all.
throughout Judea and Samaria,
and to the ends of the earth.” But grace was given to each of us
When he had said this, as they were looking on, according to the measure of Christ’s gift. ]
he was lifted up, and a cloud took him from their sight. Therefore, it says:
While they were looking intently at the sky as he was going, He ascended on high and took prisoners captive;
suddenly two men dressed in white garments stood beside them. he gave gifts to men.
They said, “Men of Galilee, What does “he ascended” mean except that he also descended
why are you standing there looking at the sky? into the lower regions of the earth?
This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven The one who descended is also the one who ascended
will return in the same way as you have seen him going into heaven.” far above all the heavens,
that he might fill all things.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
[ And he gave some as apostles, others as prophets,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 47:2-3, 6-7, 8-9) others as evangelists, others as pastors and teachers,
to equip the holy ones for the work of ministry,
R. (6) God mounts his throne to shouts of joy: a blare of trumpets for the Lord. for building up the body of Christ,
or: until we all attain to the unity of faith
R. Alleluia. and knowledge of the Son of God, to mature to manhood,
to the extent of the full stature of Christ. ]
All you peoples, clap your hands,
shout to God with cries of gladness, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
For the LORD, the Most High, the awesome,
is the great king over all the earth.—R. ALLELUIA (Matthew 28:19a, 20b)
God mounts his throne amid shouts of joy; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
the LORD, amid trumpet blasts.
Sing praise to God, sing praise; Go and teach all nations, says the Lord;
sing praise to our king, sing praise.—R. I am with you always, until the end of the world.—R.
For king of all the earth is God; GOSPEL (Mk 16:15-20)
sing hymns of praise.
God reigns over the nations, + The conclusion of the holy Gospel according to Mark:
God sits upon his holy throne.—R.
JESUS said to his disciples:
SECOND READING “Go into the whole world
and proclaim the gospel to every creature.
A (Eph 1:17-23) Whoever believes and is baptized will be saved;
whoever does not believe will be condemned.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians: These signs will accompany those who believe:
in my name they will drive out demons,
BROTHERS and sisters: they will speak new languages.
May the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, They will pick up serpents with their hands,
give you a Spirit of wisdom and revelation and if they drink any deadly thing, it will not harm them.
resulting in knowledge of him. They will lay hands on the sick, and they will recover.”
May the eyes of your hearts be enlightened,
that you may know what is the hope that belongs to his call, So then the Lord Jesus, after he spoke to them,
what are the riches of glory was taken up into heaven
in his inheritance among the holy ones, and took his seat at the right hand of God.
and what is the surpassing greatness of his power But they went forth and preached everywhere,
for us who believe, while the Lord worked with them
in accord with the exercise of his great might, and confirmed the word through accompanying signs.
which he worked in Christ,
raising him from the dead The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 109 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS for us who believe,
in accord with the exercise of his great might:
THE ASCENSION OF THE LORD—C
which he worked in Christ,
raising him from the dead
and seating him at his right hand in the heavens,
FIRST READING (Acts 1:1-11) far above every principality, authority, power, and dominion,
and every name that is named
The beginning of the Acts of the Apostles: not only in this age but also in the one to come.
And he put all things beneath his feet
IN the first book, Theophilus, and gave him as head over all things to the church,
I dealt with all that Jesus did and taught which is his body,
until the day he was taken up, the fullness of the one who fills all things in every way.
after giving instructions through the Holy Spirit
to the apostles whom he had chosen. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
He presented himself alive to them
by many proofs after he had suffered, OR
appearing to them during forty days
and speaking about the kingdom of God. B (Heb 9:24-28; 10:19-23)
While meeting with them,
he enjoined them not to depart from Jerusalem, A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
but to wait for “the promise of the Father
about which you have heard me speak; CHRIST did not enter into a sanctuary made by hands,
for John baptized with water, a copy of the true one, but heaven itself,
but in a few days you will be baptized with the Holy Spirit.” that he might now appear before God on our behalf.
Not that he might offer himself repeatedly,
When they had gathered together they asked him, as the high priest enters each year into the sanctuary
“Lord, are you at this time going to restore with blood that is not his own;
the kingdom to Israel?” if that were so, he would have had to suffer repeatedly
He answered them, “It is not for you to know the times or seasons from the foundation of the world.
that the Father has established by his own authority. But now once for all he has appeared at the end of the ages
But you will receive power when the Holy Spirit comes upon you, to take away sin by his sacrifice.
and you will be my witnesses in Jerusalem, Just as it is appointed that men and women die once,
throughout Judea and Samaria, and after this the judgment, so also Christ,
and to the ends of the earth.” offered once to take away the sins of many,
When he had said this, as they were looking on, will appear a second time, not to take away sin
he was lifted up, and a cloud took him from their sight. but to bring salvation to those who eagerly await him.
While they were looking intently at the sky as he was going,
suddenly two men dressed in white garments stood beside them. Therefore, brothers and sisters, since through the blood of Jesus
They said, “Men of Galilee, we have confidence of entrance into the sanctuary
why are you standing there looking at the sky? by the new and living way he opened for us through the veil,
This Jesus who has been taken up from you into heaven that is, his flesh,
will return in the same way as you have seen him going into heaven.” and since we have “a great priest over the house of God,”
let us approach with a sincere heart and in absolute trust,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. with our hearts sprinkled clean from an evil conscience
and our bodies washed in pure water.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 47:2-3, 6-7, 8-9) Let us hold unwaveringly to our confession that gives us hope,
for he who made the promise is trustworthy.
R. (6) God mounts his throne to shouts of joy: a blare of trumpets for the Lord.
or: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
R. Alleluia.
ALLELUIA (Matthew 28:19a, 20b)
All you peoples, clap your hands,
shout to God with cries of gladness, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
For the LORD, the Most High, the awesome,
is the great king over all the earth.—R. Go and teach all nations, says the Lord;
I am with you always, until the end of the world.—R.
God mounts his throne amid shouts of joy;
the LORD, amid trumpet blasts. GOSPEL (Lk 24:46-53)
Sing praise to God, sing praise;
sing praise to our king, sing praise.—R. + The conclusion of the holy Gospel according to Luke:
For king of all the earth is God; JESUS said to his disciples:
sing hymns of praise. “Thus it is written that the Christ would suffer
God reigns over the nations, and rise from the dead on the third day
God sits upon his holy throne.—R. and that repentance, for the forgiveness of sins,
would be preached in his name
SECOND READING to all the nations, beginning from Jerusalem.
You are witnesses of these things.
A (Eph 1:17-23) And behold I am sending the promise of my Father upon you;
but stay in the city
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians: until you are clothed with power from on high.”
BROTHERS and sisters: Then he led them out as far as Bethany,
May the God of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Father of glory, raised his hands, and blessed them.
give you a Spirit of wisdom and revelation As he blessed them he parted from them
resulting in knowledge of him. and was taken up to heaven.
May the eyes of your hearts be enlightened, They did him homage
that you may know what is the hope that belongs to his call, and then returned to Jerusalem with great joy,
what are the riches of glory and they were continually in the temple praising God.
in his inheritance among the holy ones,
and what is the surpassing greatness of his power The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 110 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (cf. John 14:18)
SEVENTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Acts 1:12-14) I will not leave you orphans, says the Lord.
I will come back to you, and your heart will rejoice.—R.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
GOSPEL (Jn 17:1-11a)
AFTER Jesus had been taken up to heaven the apostles
returned to Jerusalem + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
from the mount called Olivet, which is near Jerusalem,
a sabbath day’s journey away. JESUS raised his eyes to heaven and said,
“Father, the hour has come.
When they entered the city Give glory to your son, so that your son may glorify you,
they went to the upper room where they were staying, just as you gave him authority over all people,
Peter and John and James and Andrew, so that your son may give eternal life to all you gave him.
Philip and Thomas, Bartholomew and Matthew, Now this is eternal life,
James son of Alphaeus, Simon the Zealot, that they should know you, the only true God,
and Judas son of James. and the one whom you sent, Jesus Christ.
All these devoted themselves with one accord to prayer, I glorified you on earth
together with some women, by accomplishing the work that you gave me to do.
and Mary the mother of Jesus, and his brothers. Now glorify me, Father, with you,
with the glory that I had with you before the world began.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
“I revealed your name to those whom you gave me out of the world.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 27:1, 4, 7-8) They belonged to you, and you gave them to me,
and they have kept your word.
R. (13) I believe that I shall see the good things of the Lord in the land Now they know that everything you gave me is from you,
of the living. because the words you gave to me I have given to them,
or: and they accepted them and truly understood that I came from you,
R. Alleluia. and they have believed that you sent me.
I pray for them.
The LORD is my light and my salvation; I do not pray for the world but for the ones you have given me,
whom should I fear? because they are yours, and everything of mine is yours
The LORD is my life’s refuge; and everything of yours is mine,
of whom should I be afraid?—R. and I have been glorified in them.
And now I will no longer be in the world,
One thing I ask of the LORD; this I seek: but they are in the world, while I am coming to you.”
To dwell in the house of the LORD
all the days of my life, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
That I may gaze on the loveliness of the LORD
and contemplate his temple.—R.
Hear, O Lord, the sound of my call;
have pity on me, and answer me.
Of you my heart speaks; you my glance seeks.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Pt 4:13-16)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Peter:
BELOVED:
Rejoice to the extent that you share in the sufferings of Christ,
so that when his glory is revealed
you may also rejoice exultantly.
If you are insulted for the name of Christ, blessed are you,
for the Spirit of glory and of God rests upon you.
But let no one among you be made to suffer
as a murderer, a thief, an evildoer, or as an intriguer.
But whoever is made to suffer as a Christian should not be ashamed
but glorify God because of the name.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 111 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS we also must love one another.
SEVENTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—B No one has ever seen God.
Yet, if we love one another, God remains in us,
and his love is brought to perfection in us.
FIRST READING (Acts 1:15-17, 20a, 20c-26)
This is how we know that we remain in him and he in us,
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: that he has given us of his Spirit.
Moreover, we have seen and testify
PETER stood up in the midst of the brothers that the Father sent his Son as savior of the world.
—there was a group of about one hundred and twenty persons Whoever acknowledges that Jesus is the Son of God,
in the one place—. God remains in him and he in God.
He said, “My brothers, We have come to know and to believe in the love God has for us.
the Scripture had to be fulfilled
which the Holy Spirit spoke beforehand God is love, and whoever remains in love
through the mouth of David, concerning Judas, remains in God and God in him.
who was the guide for those who arrested Jesus.
He was numbered among us The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and was allotted a share in this ministry.
ALLELUIA (cf. John 14:18)
“For it is written in the Book of Psalms:
May another take his office. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
“Therefore, it is necessary that one of the men I will not leave you orphans, says the Lord.
who accompanied us the whole time I will come back to you, and your hearts will rejoice.—R.
the Lord Jesus came and went among us,
beginning from the baptism of John GOSPEL (Jn 17:11b-19)
until the day on which he was taken up from us,
become with us a witness to his resurrection.” + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
So they proposed two, Judas called Barsabbas,
who was also known as Justus, and Matthias. LIFTING up his eyes to heaven, Jesus prayed saying:
Then they prayed, “Holy Father, keep them in your name that you have given me,
“You, Lord, who know the hearts of all, so that they may be one just as we are one.
show which one of these two you have chosen When I was with them I protected them in your name that you gave me,
to take the place in this apostolic ministry and I guarded them, and none of them was lost
from which Judas turned away to go to his own place.” except the son of destruction,
Then they gave lots to them, and the lot fell upon Matthias, in order that the Scripture might be fulfilled.
and he was counted with the eleven apostles. But now I am coming to you.
I speak this in the world
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. so that they may share my joy completely.
I gave them your word, and the world hated them,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 103:1-2, 11-12, 19-20) because they do not belong to the world
any more than I belong to the world.
R. (19a) The Lord has set his throne in heaven. I do not ask that you take them out of the world
or: but that you keep them from the evil one.
R. Alleluia. They do not belong to the world
any more than I belong to the world.
Bless the LORD, O my soul; Consecrate them in the truth. Your word is truth.
and all my being, bless his holy name. As you sent me into the world,
Bless the LORD, O my soul, so I sent them into the world.
and forget not all his benefits.—R. And I consecrate myself for them,
so that they also may be consecrated in truth.”
For as the heavens are high above the earth,
so surpassing is his kindness toward those who fear him. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
As far as the east is from the west,
so far has he put our transgressions from us.—R.
The LORD has established his throne in heaven,
and his kingdom rules over all.
Bless the LORD, all you his angels,
you mighty in strength, who do his bidding.—R.
SECOND READING (Jn 4:11-16)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint John:
BELOVED, if God so loved us,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 112 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS The one who gives this testimony says, “Yes, I am coming soon.”
SEVENTH SUNDAY OF EASTER—C Amen! Come, Lord Jesus!
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Acts 7:55-60)
ALLELUIA (cf. John 14:18)
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
STEPHEN, filled with the Holy Spirit,
looked up intently to heaven and saw the glory of God I will not leave you orphans, says the Lord.
and Jesus standing at the right hand of God, I will come back to you, and your hearts will rejoice.—R.
and Stephen said, “Behold, I see the heavens opened
and the Son of Man standing at the right hand of God.” GOSPEL (Jn 17:20-26)
But they cried out in a loud voice,
covered their ears, and rushed upon him together. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
They threw him out of the city, and began to stone him.
The witnesses laid down their cloaks LIFTING up his eyes to heaven, Jesus prayed saying:
at the feet of a young man named Saul. “Holy Father, I pray not only for them,
As they were stoning Stephen, he called out, but also for those who will believe in me through their word,
“Lord Jesus, receive my spirit.” so that they may all be one,
Then he fell to his knees and cried out in a loud voice, as you, Father, are in me and I in you,
“Lord, do not hold this sin against them;” that they also may be in us,
and when he said this, he fell asleep. that the world may believe that you sent me.
And I have given them the glory you gave me,
The word of the Lord.—Thanks be to God. so that they may be one, as we are one,
I in them and you in me,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 97:1-2, 6-7, 9) that they may be brought to perfection as one,
that the world may know that you sent me,
R. (1a and 9a) The Lord is king, the most high over all the earth. and that you loved them even as you loved me.
or: Father, they are your gift to me.
R. Alleluia. I wish that where I am they also may be with me,
that they may see my glory that you gave me,
The LORD is king; let the earth rejoice; because you loved me before the foundation of the world.
let the many islands be glad. Righteous Father, the world also does not know you,
Justice and judgment are the foundation of his throne.—R. but I know you, and they know that you sent me.
I made known to them your name and I will make it known,
The heavens proclaim his justice, that the love with which you loved me
and all peoples see his glory. may be in them and I in them.”
All gods are prostrate before him.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
You, O LORD, are the Most High over all the earth,
exalted far above all gods.—R.
SECOND READING (Rev 22:12-14, 16-17, 20)
A reading from the Book of Revelation:
I, JOHN, heard a voice saying to me:
“Behold, I am coming soon.
I bring with me the recompense I will give to each
according to his deeds.
I am the Alpha and the Omega, the first and the last,
the beginning and the end.”
Blessed are they who wash their robes
so as to have the right to the tree of life
and enter the city through its gates.
“I, Jesus, sent my angel to give you this testimony for the churches.
I am the root and offspring of David,
the bright morning star.”
The Spirit and the bride say, “Come.”
Let the hearer say, “Come.”
Let the one who thirsts come forward,
and the one who wants it receive the gift of life-giving water.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 113 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS there were peals of thunder and lightning,
PENTECOST SUNDAY (VIGIL MASS)—ABC and a heavy cloud over the mountain,
and a very loud trumpet blast,
so that all the people in the camp trembled.
FIRST READING But Moses led the people out of the camp to meet God,
and they stationed themselves at the foot of the mountain.
A (Gn 11:1-9) Mount Sinai was all wrapped in smoke,
for the LORD came down upon it in fire.
A reading from the Book of Genesis: The smoke rose from it as though from a furnace,
and the whole mountain trembled violently.
THE whole world spoke the same language, using the same words. The trumpet blast grew louder and louder, while Moses was
While the people were migrating in the east, speaking,
they came upon a valley in the land of Shinar and settled there. and God answering him with thunder.
They said to one another,
“Come, let us mold bricks and harden them with fire.” When the LORD came down to the top of Mount Sinai,
They used bricks for stone, and bitumen for mortar. he summoned Moses to the top of the mountain.
Then they said, “Come, let us build ourselves a city
and a tower with its top in the sky, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and so make a name for ourselves;
otherwise we shall be scattered all over the earth.” OR
The LORD came down to see the city and the tower C (Ez 37:1-14)
that the people had built.
Then the LORD said: “If now, while they are one people, A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel:
all speaking the same language,
they have started to do this, THE hand of the LORD came upon me,
nothing will later stop them from doing whatever they presume and he led me out in the spirit of the LORD
to do. and set me in the center of the plain,
Let us then go down there and confuse their language, which was now filled with bones.
so that one will not understand what another says.” He made me walk among the bones in every direction
Thus the LORD scattered them from there all over the earth, so that I saw how many they were on the surface of the plain.
and they stopped building the city. How dry they were!
That is why it was called Babel, He asked me:
because there the LORD confused the speech of all the world. Son of man, can these bones come to life?
It was from that place that he scattered them all over the earth. I answered, “Lord GOD, you alone know that.”
Then he said to me:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Prophesy over these bones, and say to them:
Dry bones, hear the word of the LORD!
OR Thus says the Lord GOD to these bones:
See! I will bring spirit into you, that you may come to life.
B (Ex 19:3-8a, 16-20b) I will put sinews upon you, make flesh grow over you,
cover you with skin, and put spirit in you
A reading from the Book of Exodus: so that you may come to life and know that I am the LORD.
I, Ezekiel, prophesied as I had been told,
MOSES went up the mountain to God. and even as I was prophesying I heard a noise;
Then the LORD called to him and said, it was a rattling as the bones came together, bone joining bone.
“Thus shall you say to the house of Jacob; I saw the sinews and the flesh come upon them,
tell the Israelites: and the skin cover them, but there was no spirit in them.
You have seen for yourselves how I treated the Egyptians Then the LORD said to me:
and how I bore you up on eagle wings Prophesy to the spirit, prophesy, son of man,
and brought you here to myself. and say to the spirit: Thus says the Lord GOD:
Therefore, if you hearken to my voice and keep my covenant, From the four winds come, O spirit,
you shall be my special possession, and breathe into these slain that they may come to life.
dearer to me than all other people, I prophesied as he told me, and the spirit came into them;
though all the earth is mine. they came alive and stood upright, a vast army.
You shall be to me a kingdom of priests, a holy nation. Then he said to me:
That is what you must tell the Israelites.” Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel.
So Moses went and summoned the elders of the people. They have been saying,
When he set before them “Our bones are dried up,
all that the LORD had ordered him to tell them, our hope is lost, and we are cut off.”
the people all answered together, Therefore, prophesy and say to them: Thus says the Lord GOD:
“Everything the LORD has said, we will do.” O my people, I will open your graves
and have you rise from them,
On the morning of the third day and bring you back to the land of Israel.
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 114 ---
Then you shall know that I am the LORD, SECOND READING (Rom 8:22-27)
when I open your graves and have you rise from them,
O my people! A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
I will put my spirit in you that you may live,
and I will settle you upon your land; BROTHERS and sisters:
thus you shall know that I am the LORD. We know that all creation is groaning in labor pains even until now;
I have promised, and I will do it, says the LORD. and not only that, but we ourselves,
who have the firstfruits of the Spirit,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. we also groan within ourselves
as we wait for adoption, the redemption of our bodies.
OR For in hope we were saved.
Now hope that sees is not hope.
D (Jl 3:1-5) For who hopes for what one sees?
But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait with endurance.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Joel:
In the same way, the Spirit too comes to the aid of our weakness;
THUS says the Lord: for we do not know how to pray as we ought,
I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh. but the Spirit himself intercedes with inexpressible groanings.
Your sons and daughters shall prophesy, And the one who searches hearts
your old men shall dream dreams, knows what is the intention of the Spirit,
your young men shall see visions; because he intercedes for the holy ones
even upon the servants and the handmaids, according to God’s will.
in those days, I will pour out my spirit.
And I will work wonders in the heavens and on the earth, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
blood, fire, and columns of smoke;
the sun will be turned to darkness, ALLELUIA
and the moon to blood,
at the coming of the day of the LORD, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
the great and terrible day.
Then everyone shall be rescued Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of the faithful
who calls on the name of the LORD; and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
for on Mount Zion there shall be a remnant,
as the LORD has said, GOSPEL (Jn 7:37-39)
and in Jerusalem survivors
whom the LORD shall call. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. ON the last and greatest day of the feast,
Jesus stood up and exclaimed,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1-2, 24, 35, 27-28, 29, 30) “Let anyone who thirsts come to me and drink.
As Scripture says:
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. Rivers of living water will flow from within him who
or: believes in me.”
R. Alleluia.
He said this in reference to the Spirit
Bless the LORD, O my soul! that those who came to believe in him were to receive.
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! There was, of course, no Spirit yet,
You are clothed with majesty and glory, because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
robed in light as with a cloak.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
In wisdom you have wrought them all—
the earth is full of your creatures;
bless the LORD, O my soul! Alleluia.—R.
Creatures all look to you
to give them food in due time.
When you give it to them, they gather it;
when you open your hand, they are filled with good things.—R.
If you take away their breath, they perish
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 115 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (Rom 8:22-27)
PENTECOST SUNDAY (VIGIL MASS)—ABC
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
Only First Reading Option A given below.
BROTHERS and sisters:
We know that all creation is groaning in labor pains even until now;
FIRST READING and not only that, but we ourselves,
who have the firstfruits of the Spirit,
A (Gn 11:1-9) we also groan within ourselves
as we wait for adoption, the redemption of our bodies.
A reading from the Book of Genesis: For in hope we were saved.
Now hope that sees is not hope.
THE whole world spoke the same language, using the same words. For who hopes for what one sees?
While the people were migrating in the east, But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait with endurance.
they came upon a valley in the land of Shinar and settled there.
They said to one another, In the same way, the Spirit too comes to the aid of our weakness;
“Come, let us mold bricks and harden them with fire.” for we do not know how to pray as we ought,
They used bricks for stone, and bitumen for mortar. but the Spirit himself intercedes with inexpressible groanings.
Then they said, “Come, let us build ourselves a city And the one who searches hearts
and a tower with its top in the sky, knows what is the intention of the Spirit,
and so make a name for ourselves; because he intercedes for the holy ones
otherwise we shall be scattered all over the earth.” according to God’s will.
The LORD came down to see the city and the tower The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
that the people had built.
Then the LORD said: “If now, while they are one people, ALLELUIA
all speaking the same language,
they have started to do this, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
nothing will later stop them from doing whatever they presume
to do. Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of the faithful
Let us then go down there and confuse their language, and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
so that one will not understand what another says.”
Thus the LORD scattered them from there all over the earth, GOSPEL (Jn 7:37-39)
and they stopped building the city.
That is why it was called Babel, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
because there the LORD confused the speech of all the world.
It was from that place that he scattered them all over the earth. ON the last and greatest day of the feast,
Jesus stood up and exclaimed,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. “Let anyone who thirsts come to me and drink.
As Scripture says:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1-2, 24, 35, 27-28, 29, 30) Rivers of living water will flow from within him who
believes in me.”
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth.
or: He said this in reference to the Spirit
R. Alleluia. that those who came to believe in him were to receive.
There was, of course, no Spirit yet,
Bless the LORD, O my soul! because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed!
You are clothed with majesty and glory, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
robed in light as with a cloak.—R.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
In wisdom you have wrought them all—
the earth is full of your creatures;
bless the LORD, O my soul! Alleluia.—R.
Creatures all look to you
to give them food in due time.
When you give it to them, they gather it;
when you open your hand, they are filled with good things.—R.
If you take away their breath, they perish
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 116 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Creatures all look to you
PENTECOST SUNDAY (VIGIL MASS)—ABC to give them food in due time.
When you give it to them, they gather it;
Only First Reading Option B given below. when you open your hand, they are filled with good things.—R.
If you take away their breath, they perish
FIRST READING and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
B (Ex 19:3-8a, 16-20b) and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
A reading from the Book of Exodus: SECOND READING (Rom 8:22-27)
MOSES went up the mountain to God. A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
Then the LORD called to him and said,
“Thus shall you say to the house of Jacob; BROTHERS and sisters:
tell the Israelites: We know that all creation is groaning in labor pains even until now;
You have seen for yourselves how I treated the Egyptians and not only that, but we ourselves,
and how I bore you up on eagle wings who have the firstfruits of the Spirit,
and brought you here to myself. we also groan within ourselves
Therefore, if you hearken to my voice and keep my covenant, as we wait for adoption, the redemption of our bodies.
you shall be my special possession, For in hope we were saved.
dearer to me than all other people, Now hope that sees is not hope.
though all the earth is mine. For who hopes for what one sees?
You shall be to me a kingdom of priests, a holy nation. But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait with endurance.
That is what you must tell the Israelites.”
So Moses went and summoned the elders of the people. In the same way, the Spirit too comes to the aid of our weakness;
When he set before them for we do not know how to pray as we ought,
all that the LORD had ordered him to tell them, but the Spirit himself intercedes with inexpressible groanings.
the people all answered together, And the one who searches hearts
“Everything the LORD has said, we will do.” knows what is the intention of the Spirit,
because he intercedes for the holy ones
On the morning of the third day according to God’s will.
there were peals of thunder and lightning,
and a heavy cloud over the mountain, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and a very loud trumpet blast,
so that all the people in the camp trembled. ALLELUIA
But Moses led the people out of the camp to meet God,
and they stationed themselves at the foot of the mountain. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Mount Sinai was all wrapped in smoke,
for the LORD came down upon it in fire. Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of the faithful
The smoke rose from it as though from a furnace, and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
and the whole mountain trembled violently.
The trumpet blast grew louder and louder, while Moses was GOSPEL (Jn 7:37-39)
speaking,
and God answering him with thunder. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
When the LORD came down to the top of Mount Sinai, ON the last and greatest day of the feast,
he summoned Moses to the top of the mountain. Jesus stood up and exclaimed,
“Let anyone who thirsts come to me and drink.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. As Scripture says:
Rivers of living water will flow from within him who
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1-2, 24, 35, 27-28, 29, 30) believes in me.”
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. He said this in reference to the Spirit
or: that those who came to believe in him were to receive.
R. Alleluia. There was, of course, no Spirit yet,
because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
Bless the LORD, O my soul!
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
You are clothed with majesty and glory,
robed in light as with a cloak.—R.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
In wisdom you have wrought them all—
the earth is full of your creatures;
bless the LORD, O my soul! Alleluia.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 117 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS O LORD, my God, you are great indeed!
PENTECOST SUNDAY (VIGIL MASS)—ABC You are clothed with majesty and glory,
robed in light as with a cloak.—R.
Only First Reading Option C given below.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
In wisdom you have wrought them all—
the earth is full of your creatures;
FIRST READING
bless the LORD, O my soul! Alleluia.—R.
C (Ez 37:1-14)
Creatures all look to you
to give them food in due time.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel:
When you give it to them, they gather it;
when you open your hand, they are filled with good things.—R.
THE hand of the LORD came upon me,
and he led me out in the spirit of the LORD
If you take away their breath, they perish
and set me in the center of the plain,
and return to their dust.
which was now filled with bones.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
He made me walk among the bones in every direction
and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
so that I saw how many they were on the surface of the plain.
How dry they were!
SECOND READING (Rom 8:22-27)
He asked me:
Son of man, can these bones come to life?
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
I answered, “Lord GOD, you alone know that.”
Then he said to me:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Prophesy over these bones, and say to them:
We know that all creation is groaning in labor pains even until now;
Dry bones, hear the word of the LORD!
and not only that, but we ourselves,
Thus says the Lord GOD to these bones:
who have the firstfruits of the Spirit,
See! I will bring spirit into you, that you may come to life.
we also groan within ourselves
I will put sinews upon you, make flesh grow over you,
as we wait for adoption, the redemption of our bodies.
cover you with skin, and put spirit in you
For in hope we were saved.
so that you may come to life and know that I am the LORD.
Now hope that sees is not hope.
I, Ezekiel, prophesied as I had been told,
For who hopes for what one sees?
and even as I was prophesying I heard a noise;
But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait with endurance.
it was a rattling as the bones came together, bone joining bone.
I saw the sinews and the flesh come upon them,
In the same way, the Spirit too comes to the aid of our weakness;
and the skin cover them, but there was no spirit in them.
for we do not know how to pray as we ought,
Then the LORD said to me:
but the Spirit himself intercedes with inexpressible groanings.
Prophesy to the spirit, prophesy, son of man,
And the one who searches hearts
and say to the spirit: Thus says the Lord GOD:
knows what is the intention of the Spirit,
From the four winds come, O spirit,
because he intercedes for the holy ones
and breathe into these slain that they may come to life.
according to God’s will.
I prophesied as he told me, and the spirit came into them;
they came alive and stood upright, a vast army.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Then he said to me:
Son of man, these bones are the whole house of Israel.
ALLELUIA
They have been saying,
“Our bones are dried up,
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
our hope is lost, and we are cut off.”
Therefore, prophesy and say to them: Thus says the Lord GOD:
Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of the faithful
O my people, I will open your graves
and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
and have you rise from them,
and bring you back to the land of Israel.
GOSPEL (Jn 7:37-39)
Then you shall know that I am the LORD,
when I open your graves and have you rise from them,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
O my people!
I will put my spirit in you that you may live,
ON the last and greatest day of the feast,
and I will settle you upon your land;
Jesus stood up and exclaimed,
thus you shall know that I am the LORD.
“Let anyone who thirsts come to me and drink.
I have promised, and I will do it, says the LORD.
As Scripture says:
Rivers of living water will flow from within him who
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
believes in me.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1-2, 24, 35, 27-28, 29, 30)
He said this in reference to the Spirit
that those who came to believe in him were to receive.
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth.
There was, of course, no Spirit yet,
or:
because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
R. Alleluia.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Bless the LORD, O my soul!
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 118 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and not only that, but we ourselves,
PENTECOST SUNDAY (VIGIL MASS)—ABC who have the firstfruits of the Spirit,
we also groan within ourselves
Only First Reading Option D given below. as we wait for adoption, the redemption of our bodies.
For in hope we were saved.
Now hope that sees is not hope.
FIRST READING For who hopes for what one sees?
But if we hope for what we do not see, we wait with endurance.
D (Jl 3:1-5)
In the same way, the Spirit too comes to the aid of our weakness;
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Joel: for we do not know how to pray as we ought,
but the Spirit himself intercedes with inexpressible groanings.
THUS says the Lord: And the one who searches hearts
I will pour out my spirit upon all flesh. knows what is the intention of the Spirit,
Your sons and daughters shall prophesy, because he intercedes for the holy ones
your old men shall dream dreams, according to God’s will.
your young men shall see visions;
even upon the servants and the handmaids, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
in those days, I will pour out my spirit.
And I will work wonders in the heavens and on the earth, ALLELUIA
blood, fire, and columns of smoke;
the sun will be turned to darkness, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and the moon to blood,
at the coming of the day of the LORD, Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of the faithful
the great and terrible day. and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
Then everyone shall be rescued
who calls on the name of the LORD; GOSPEL (Jn 7:37-39)
for on Mount Zion there shall be a remnant,
as the LORD has said, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and in Jerusalem survivors
whom the LORD shall call. ON the last and greatest day of the feast,
Jesus stood up and exclaimed,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. “Let anyone who thirsts come to me and drink.
As Scripture says:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1-2, 24, 35, 27-28, 29, 30) Rivers of living water will flow from within him who
believes in me.”
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth.
or: He said this in reference to the Spirit
R. Alleluia. that those who came to believe in him were to receive.
There was, of course, no Spirit yet,
Bless the LORD, O my soul! because Jesus had not yet been glorified.
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed!
You are clothed with majesty and glory, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
robed in light as with a cloak.—R.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
In wisdom you have wrought them all—
the earth is full of your creatures;
bless the LORD, O my soul! Alleluia.—R.
Creatures all look to you
to give them food in due time.
When you give it to them, they gather it;
when you open your hand, they are filled with good things.—R.
If you take away their breath, they perish
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 8:22-27)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
We know that all creation is groaning in labor pains even until now;
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 119 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS As a body is one though it has many parts,
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—A and all the parts of the body, though many, are one body,
so also Christ.
For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body,
whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free persons,
FIRST READING (Acts 2:1-11)
and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled,
SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
they were all in one place together.
And suddenly there came from the sky
Come, Holy Spirit, come!
a noise like a strong driving wind,
And from your celestial home
and it filled the entire house in which they were.
Shed a ray of light divine!
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire,
Come, Father of the poor!
which parted and came to rest on each one of them.
Come, source of all our store!
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit
Come, within our bosoms shine.
and began to speak in different tongues,
You, of comforters the best;
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim.
You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
Sweet refreshment here below;
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven
In our labor, rest most sweet;
staying in Jerusalem.
Grateful coolness in the heat;
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd,
Solace in the midst of woe.
but they were confused
O most blessed Light divine,
because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
Shine within these hearts of yours,
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked,
And our inmost being fill!
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans?
Where you are not, we have naught,
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language?
Nothing good in deed or thought,
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites,
Nothing free from taint of ill.
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia,
Heal our wounds, our strength renew;
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia,
On our dryness pour your dew;
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene,
Wash the stains of guilt away:
as well as travelers from Rome,
Bend the stubborn heart and will;
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs,
Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues
Guide the steps that go astray.
of the mighty acts of God.”
On the faithful, who adore
And confess you, evermore
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
In your sevenfold gift descend;
Give them virtue’s sure reward;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34)
Give them your salvation, Lord;
Give them joys that never end. Amen.
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth.
Alleluia.
or:
R. Alleluia.
ALLELUIA
Bless the LORD, O my soul!
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed!
How manifold are your works, O Lord!
Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
the earth is full of your creatures;—R.
and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
May the glory of the LORD endure forever;
GOSPEL (Jn 20:19-23)
may the LORD be glad in his works!
Pleasing to him be my theme;
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
I will be glad in the LORD.—R.
ON the evening of that first day of the week,
If you take away their breath, they perish
when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
and return to their dust.
for fear of the Jews,
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
Jesus came and stood in their midst
and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 12:3b-7, 12-13)
The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
BROTHERS and sisters:
“Receive the Holy Spirit.
No one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the Holy Spirit.
Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit;
and whose sins you retain are retained.”
there are different forms of service but the same Lord;
there are different workings but the same God
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
who produces all of them in everyone.
To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit
is given for some benefit.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 120 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS BROTHERS and sisters:
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—B No one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the Holy Spirit.
There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit;
there are different forms of service but the same Lord;
FIRST READING (Acts 2:1-11) there are different workings but the same God
who produces all of them in everyone.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit
is given for some benefit.
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled,
they were all in one place together. As a body is one though it has many parts,
And suddenly there came from the sky and all the parts of the body, though many, are one body,
a noise like a strong driving wind, so also Christ.
and it filled the entire house in which they were. For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body,
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free persons,
which parted and came to rest on each one of them. and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit
and began to speak in different tongues, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim.
OR
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven
staying in Jerusalem. B (Gal 5:16-25)
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd,
but they were confused A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians:
because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, BROTHERS and sisters, live by the Spirit
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? and you will certainly not gratify the desire of the flesh.
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language? For the flesh has desires against the Spirit,
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, and the Spirit against the flesh;
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, these are opposed to each other,
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, so that you may not do what you want.
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, But if you are guided by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
as well as travelers from Rome, Now the works of the flesh are obvious:
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, immorality, impurity, lust, idolatry,
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues sorcery, hatreds, rivalry, jealousy,
of the mighty acts of God.” outbursts of fury, acts of selfishness,
dissensions, factions, occasions of envy,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. drinking bouts, orgies, and the like.
I warn you, as I warned you before,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34) that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of
God.
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. In contrast, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
or: patience, kindness, generosity,
R. Alleluia. faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.
Against such there is no law.
Bless the LORD, O my soul! Now those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified their flesh
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! with its passions and desires.
How manifold are your works, O LORD! If we live in the Spirit, let us also follow the Spirit.
the earth is full of your creatures;—R.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
May the glory of the LORD endure forever;
may the LORD be glad in his works! SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
Pleasing to him be my theme;
I will be glad in the LORD.—R. Come, Holy Spirit, come!
And from your celestial home
If you take away their breath, they perish Shed a ray of light divine!
and return to their dust. Come, Father of the poor!
When you send forth your spirit, they are created, Come, source of all our store!
and you renew the face of the earth.—R. Come, within our bosoms shine.
You, of comforters the best;
SECOND READING You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
Sweet refreshment here below;
A (1 Cor 12:3b-7, 12-13) In our labor, rest most sweet;
Grateful coolness in the heat;
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: Solace in the midst of woe.
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 121 ---
O most blessed Light divine, “I have much more to tell you, but you cannot bear it now.
Shine within these hearts of yours, But when he comes, the Spirit of truth,
And our inmost being fill! he will guide you to all truth.
Where you are not, we have naught, He will not speak on his own,
Nothing good in deed or thought, but he will speak what he hears,
Nothing free from taint of ill. and will declare to you the things that are coming.
Heal our wounds, our strength renew; He will glorify me,
On our dryness pour your dew; because he will take from what is mine and declare it to you.
Wash the stains of guilt away: Everything that the Father has is mine;
Bend the stubborn heart and will; for this reason I told you that he will take from what is mine
Melt the frozen, warm the chill; and declare it to you.”
Guide the steps that go astray.
On the faithful, who adore The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
And confess you, evermore
In your sevenfold gift descend;
Give them virtue’s sure reward;
Give them your salvation, Lord;
Give them joys that never end. Amen.
Alleluia.
ALLELUIA
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
GOSPEL
A (Jn 20:19-23)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
ON the evening of that first day of the week,
when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in their midst
and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
“Receive the Holy Spirit.
Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
and whose sins you retain are retained.”
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
OR
B (Jn 15:26-27; 16:12-15)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
JESUS said to his disciples:
“When the Advocate comes whom I will send you from the
Father,
the Spirit of truth that proceeds from the Father,
he will testify to me.
And you also testify,
because you have been with me from the beginning.
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 122 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit
is given for some benefit.
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—B
As a body is one though it has many parts,
Only Second Reading Option A and Gospel Option A given below.
and all the parts of the body, though many, are one body,
so also Christ.
For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body,
FIRST READING (Acts 2:1-11) whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free persons,
and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled,
they were all in one place together. SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
And suddenly there came from the sky
a noise like a strong driving wind, Come, Holy Spirit, come!
and it filled the entire house in which they were. And from your celestial home
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, Shed a ray of light divine!
which parted and came to rest on each one of them. Come, Father of the poor!
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit Come, source of all our store!
and began to speak in different tongues, Come, within our bosoms shine.
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim. You, of comforters the best;
You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven Sweet refreshment here below;
staying in Jerusalem. In our labor, rest most sweet;
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, Grateful coolness in the heat;
but they were confused Solace in the midst of woe.
because each one heard them speaking in his own language. O most blessed Light divine,
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, Shine within these hearts of yours,
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? And our inmost being fill!
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language? Where you are not, we have naught,
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, Nothing good in deed or thought,
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Nothing free from taint of ill.
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Heal our wounds, our strength renew;
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, On our dryness pour your dew;
as well as travelers from Rome, Wash the stains of guilt away:
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, Bend the stubborn heart and will;
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
of the mighty acts of God.” Guide the steps that go astray.
On the faithful, who adore
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. And confess you, evermore
In your sevenfold gift descend;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34) Give them virtue’s sure reward;
Give them your salvation, Lord;
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. Give them joys that never end. Amen.
or: Alleluia.
R. Alleluia.
ALLELUIA
Bless the LORD, O my soul!
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! R. Alleluia, alleluia.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
the earth is full of your creatures;—R. Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
May the glory of the LORD endure forever;
may the LORD be glad in his works! GOSPEL
Pleasing to him be my theme;
I will be glad in the LORD.—R. A (Jn 20:19-23)
If you take away their breath, they perish + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created, ON the evening of that first day of the week,
and you renew the face of the earth.—R. when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
for fear of the Jews,
SECOND READING Jesus came and stood in their midst
and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
A (1 Cor 12:3b-7, 12-13) When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
BROTHERS and sisters: And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
No one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the Holy Spirit. “Receive the Holy Spirit.
There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit; Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
there are different forms of service but the same Lord; and whose sins you retain are retained.”
there are different workings but the same God
who produces all of them in everyone. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 123 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS so also Christ.
For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body,
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—B
whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free persons,
and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.
Only Second Reading Option A and Gospel Option B given below.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Acts 2:1-11) SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: Come, Holy Spirit, come!
And from your celestial home
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled, Shed a ray of light divine!
they were all in one place together. Come, Father of the poor!
And suddenly there came from the sky Come, source of all our store!
a noise like a strong driving wind, Come, within our bosoms shine.
and it filled the entire house in which they were. You, of comforters the best;
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
which parted and came to rest on each one of them. Sweet refreshment here below;
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit In our labor, rest most sweet;
and began to speak in different tongues, Grateful coolness in the heat;
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim. Solace in the midst of woe.
O most blessed Light divine,
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven Shine within these hearts of yours,
staying in Jerusalem. And our inmost being fill!
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, Where you are not, we have naught,
but they were confused Nothing good in deed or thought,
because each one heard them speaking in his own language. Nothing free from taint of ill.
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, Heal our wounds, our strength renew;
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? On our dryness pour your dew;
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language? Wash the stains of guilt away:
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, Bend the stubborn heart and will;
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Guide the steps that go astray.
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, On the faithful, who adore
as well as travelers from Rome, And confess you, evermore
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, In your sevenfold gift descend;
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues Give them virtue’s sure reward;
of the mighty acts of God.” Give them your salvation, Lord;
Give them joys that never end. Amen.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Alleluia.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34) ALLELUIA
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
or:
R. Alleluia. Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
Bless the LORD, O my soul!
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! GOSPEL
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
the earth is full of your creatures;—R. B (Jn 15:26-27; 16:12-15)
May the glory of the LORD endure forever; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
may the LORD be glad in his works!
Pleasing to him be my theme; JESUS said to his disciples:
I will be glad in the LORD.—R. “When the Advocate comes whom I will send you from the Father,
the Spirit of truth that proceeds from the Father,
If you take away their breath, they perish he will testify to me.
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created, And you also testify,
and you renew the face of the earth.—R. because you have been with me from the beginning.
SECOND READING “I have much more to tell you, but you cannot bear it now.
But when he comes, the Spirit of truth,
A (1 Cor 12:3b-7, 12-13) he will guide you to all truth.
He will not speak on his own,
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: but he will speak what he hears,
BROTHERS and sisters: and will declare to you the things that are coming.
No one can say, “Jesus is Lord,” except by the Holy Spirit. He will glorify me,
There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit; because he will take from what is mine and declare it to you.
there are different forms of service but the same Lord; Everything that the Father has is mine;
there are different workings but the same God for this reason I told you that he will take from what is mine
who produces all of them in everyone. and declare it to you.”
To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit
is given for some benefit. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
As a body is one though it has many parts,
and all the parts of the body, though many, are one body,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 124 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS outbursts of fury, acts of selfishness,
dissensions, factions, occasions of envy,
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—B
drinking bouts, orgies, and the like.
I warn you, as I warned you before,
Only Second Reading Option B and Gospel Option A given below. that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.
In contrast, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
patience, kindness, generosity,
FIRST READING (Acts 2:1-11) faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.
Against such there is no law.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: Now those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified their flesh
with its passions and desires.
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled, If we live in the Spirit, let us also follow the Spirit.
they were all in one place together.
And suddenly there came from the sky The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
a noise like a strong driving wind,
and it filled the entire house in which they were. SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire,
which parted and came to rest on each one of them. Come, Holy Spirit, come!
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit And from your celestial home
and began to speak in different tongues, Shed a ray of light divine!
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim. Come, Father of the poor!
Come, source of all our store!
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven Come, within our bosoms shine.
staying in Jerusalem. You, of comforters the best;
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
but they were confused Sweet refreshment here below;
because each one heard them speaking in his own language. In our labor, rest most sweet;
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, Grateful coolness in the heat;
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? Solace in the midst of woe.
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language? O most blessed Light divine,
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, Shine within these hearts of yours,
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, And our inmost being fill!
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Where you are not, we have naught,
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, Nothing good in deed or thought,
as well as travelers from Rome, Nothing free from taint of ill.
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, Heal our wounds, our strength renew;
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues On our dryness pour your dew;
of the mighty acts of God.” Wash the stains of guilt away:
Bend the stubborn heart and will;
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
Guide the steps that go astray.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34) On the faithful, who adore
And confess you, evermore
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. In your sevenfold gift descend;
or: Give them virtue’s sure reward;
R. Alleluia. Give them your salvation, Lord;
Give them joys that never end. Amen.
Bless the LORD, O my soul! Alleluia.
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed!
How manifold are your works, O LORD! ALLELUIA
the earth is full of your creatures;—R.
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
May the glory of the LORD endure forever;
may the LORD be glad in his works! Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
Pleasing to him be my theme; and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
I will be glad in the LORD.—R.
GOSPEL
If you take away their breath, they perish
and return to their dust. A (Jn 20:19-23)
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
and you renew the face of the earth.—R. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
SECOND READING ON the evening of that first day of the week,
when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
B (Gal 5:16-25) for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in their midst
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians: and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
BROTHERS and sisters, live by the Spirit The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
and you will certainly not gratify the desire of the flesh. Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
For the flesh has desires against the Spirit, As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
and the Spirit against the flesh; And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
these are opposed to each other, “Receive the Holy Spirit.
so that you may not do what you want. Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
But if you are guided by the Spirit, you are not under the law. and whose sins you retain are retained.”
Now the works of the flesh are obvious:
immorality, impurity, lust, idolatry, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
sorcery, hatreds, rivalry, jealousy,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 125 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS drinking bouts, orgies, and the like.
I warn you, as I warned you before,
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—B
that those who do such things will not inherit the kingdom of God.
In contrast, the fruit of the Spirit is love, joy, peace,
Only Second Reading Option B and Gospel Option B given below. patience, kindness, generosity,
faithfulness, gentleness, self-control.
Against such there is no law.
Now those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified their flesh
FIRST READING (Acts 2:1-11)
with its passions and desires.
If we live in the Spirit, let us also follow the Spirit.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled,
they were all in one place together.
SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
And suddenly there came from the sky
a noise like a strong driving wind,
Come, Holy Spirit, come!
and it filled the entire house in which they were.
And from your celestial home
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire,
Shed a ray of light divine!
which parted and came to rest on each one of them.
Come, Father of the poor!
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit
Come, source of all our store!
and began to speak in different tongues,
Come, within our bosoms shine.
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim.
You, of comforters the best;
You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven
Sweet refreshment here below;
staying in Jerusalem.
In our labor, rest most sweet;
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd,
Grateful coolness in the heat;
but they were confused
Solace in the midst of woe.
because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
O most blessed Light divine,
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked,
Shine within these hearts of yours,
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans?
And our inmost being fill!
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language?
Where you are not, we have naught,
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites,
Nothing good in deed or thought,
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia,
Nothing free from taint of ill.
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia,
Heal our wounds, our strength renew;
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene,
On our dryness pour your dew;
as well as travelers from Rome,
Wash the stains of guilt away:
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs,
Bend the stubborn heart and will;
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues
Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
of the mighty acts of God.”
Guide the steps that go astray.
On the faithful, who adore
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
And confess you, evermore
In your sevenfold gift descend;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34)
Give them virtue’s sure reward;
Give them your salvation, Lord;
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth.
Give them joys that never end. Amen.
or:
Alleluia.
R. Alleluia.
ALLELUIA
Bless the LORD, O my soul!
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed!
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
the earth is full of your creatures;—R.
Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
May the glory of the LORD endure forever;
may the LORD be glad in his works!
GOSPEL
Pleasing to him be my theme;
I will be glad in the LORD.—R.
B (Jn 15:26-27; 16:12-15)
If you take away their breath, they perish
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
JESUS said to his disciples:
and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
“When the Advocate comes whom I will send you from the Father,
the Spirit of truth that proceeds from the Father,
SECOND READING
he will testify to me.
B (Gal 5:16-25)
And you also testify,
because you have been with me from the beginning.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians:
“I have much more to tell you, but you cannot bear it now.
BROTHERS and sisters, live by the Spirit
But when he comes, the Spirit of truth,
and you will certainly not gratify the desire of the flesh.
he will guide you to all truth.
For the flesh has desires against the Spirit,
He will not speak on his own,
and the Spirit against the flesh;
but he will speak what he hears,
these are opposed to each other,
and will declare to you the things that are coming.
so that you may not do what you want.
He will glorify me,
But if you are guided by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
because he will take from what is mine and declare it to you.
Now the works of the flesh are obvious:
Everything that the Father has is mine;
immorality, impurity, lust, idolatry,
for this reason I told you that he will take from what is mine
sorcery, hatreds, rivalry, jealousy,
and declare it to you.”
outbursts of fury, acts of selfishness,
dissensions, factions, occasions of envy,
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 126 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS BROTHERS and sisters:
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—C No one can say, “Jesus is Lord, ” except by the Holy Spirit.
There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit;
there are different forms of service but the same Lord;
FIRST READING there are different workings but the same God
who produces all of them in everyone.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 2:1-11) To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit
is given for some benefit.
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled,
they were all in one place together. As a body is one though it has many parts,
And suddenly there came from the sky and all the parts of the body, though many, are one body,
a noise like a strong driving wind, so also Christ.
and it filled the entire house in which they were. For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body,
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free persons,
which parted and came to rest on each one of them. and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit
and began to speak in different tongues, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim.
OR
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven
staying in Jerusalem. B (Rom 8:8-17)
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd,
but they were confused A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
because each one heard them speaking in his own language.
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, BROTHERS and sisters:
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? Those who are in the flesh cannot please God.
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language? But you are not in the flesh;
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, on the contrary, you are in the spirit,
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, if only the Spirit of God dwells in you.
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Whoever does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him.
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, But if Christ is in you,
as well as travelers from Rome, although the body is dead because of sin,
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, the spirit is alive because of righteousness.
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues If the Spirit of the one who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you,
of the mighty acts of God.” the one who raised Christ from the dead
will give life to your mortal bodies also,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. through his Spirit that dwells in you.
Consequently, brothers and sisters,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34) we are not debtors to the flesh,
to live according to the flesh.
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. For if you live according to the flesh, you will die,
or: but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body,
R. Alleluia. you will live.
Bless the LORD, O my soul! For those who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear,
How manifold are your works, O LORD! but you received a Spirit of adoption,
the earth is full of your creatures;—R. through whom we cry, “Abba, Father!”
The Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit
May the glory of the LORD endure forever; that we are children of God,
may the LORD be glad in his works! and if children, then heirs,
Pleasing to him be my theme; heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ,
I will be glad in the LORD.—R. if only we suffer with him
so that we may also be glorified with him.
If you take away their breath, they perish
and return to their dust. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created,
and you renew the face of the earth.—R. SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
SECOND READING Come, Holy Spirit, come!
And from your celestial home
A (1 Cor 12:3b-7, 12-13) Shed a ray of light divine!
Come, Father of the poor!
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: Come, source of all our store!
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 127 ---
Come, within our bosoms shine. And I will ask the Father,
You, of comforters the best; and he will give you another Advocate to be with you always.
You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
Sweet refreshment here below; “Whoever loves me will keep my word,
In our labor, rest most sweet; and my Father will love him,
Grateful coolness in the heat; and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him.
Solace in the midst of woe. Those who do not love me do not keep my words;
O most blessed Light divine, yet the word you hear is not mine
Shine within these hearts of yours, but that of the Father who sent me.
And our inmost being fill!
Where you are not, we have naught, “I have told you this while I am with you.
Nothing good in deed or thought, The Advocate, the Holy Spirit whom the Father will send
Nothing free from taint of ill. in my name,
Heal our wounds, our strength renew; will teach you everything
On our dryness pour your dew; and remind you of all that I told you.”
Wash the stains of guilt away:
Bend the stubborn heart and will; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
Guide the steps that go astray.
On the faithful, who adore
And confess you, evermore
In your sevenfold gift descend;
Give them virtue’s sure reward;
Give them your salvation, Lord;
Give them joys that never end. Amen.
Alleluia.
ALLELUIA
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
GOSPEL
A (Jn 20:19-23)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
ON the evening of that first day of the week,
when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
for fear of the Jews,
Jesus came and stood in their midst
and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
“Receive the Holy Spirit.
Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
and whose sins you retain are retained.”
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
OR
B (Jn 14:15-16, 23b-26)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
JESUS said to his disciples:
“If you love me, you will keep my commandments.
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 128 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit
is given for some benefit.
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—C
As a body is one though it has many parts,
Only Second Reading Option A and Gospel Option A given below.
and all the parts of the body, though many, are one body,
so also Christ.
For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body,
FIRST READING whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free persons,
and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 2:1-11)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled,
they were all in one place together. SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
And suddenly there came from the sky
a noise like a strong driving wind, Come, Holy Spirit, come!
and it filled the entire house in which they were. And from your celestial home
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, Shed a ray of light divine!
which parted and came to rest on each one of them. Come, Father of the poor!
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit Come, source of all our store!
and began to speak in different tongues, Come, within our bosoms shine.
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim. You, of comforters the best;
You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven Sweet refreshment here below;
staying in Jerusalem. In our labor, rest most sweet;
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, Grateful coolness in the heat;
but they were confused Solace in the midst of woe.
because each one heard them speaking in his own language. O most blessed Light divine,
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, Shine within these hearts of yours,
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? And our inmost being fill!
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language? Where you are not, we have naught,
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, Nothing good in deed or thought,
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Nothing free from taint of ill.
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Heal our wounds, our strength renew;
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, On our dryness pour your dew;
as well as travelers from Rome, Wash the stains of guilt away:
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, Bend the stubborn heart and will;
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
of the mighty acts of God.” Guide the steps that go astray.
On the faithful, who adore
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. And confess you, evermore
In your sevenfold gift descend;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34) Give them virtue’s sure reward;
Give them your salvation, Lord;
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. Give them joys that never end. Amen.
or: Alleluia.
R. Alleluia.
ALLELUIA
Bless the LORD, O my soul!
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! R. Alleluia, alleluia.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
the earth is full of your creatures;—R. Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
May the glory of the LORD endure forever;
may the LORD be glad in his works! GOSPEL
Pleasing to him be my theme;
I will be glad in the LORD.—R. A (Jn 20:19-23)
If you take away their breath, they perish + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created, ON the evening of that first day of the week,
and you renew the face of the earth.—R. when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
for fear of the Jews,
SECOND READING Jesus came and stood in their midst
and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
A (1 Cor 12:3b-7, 12-13) When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
BROTHERS and sisters: And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
No one can say, “Jesus is Lord, ” except by the Holy Spirit. “Receive the Holy Spirit.
There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit; Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
there are different forms of service but the same Lord; and whose sins you retain are retained.”
there are different workings but the same God
who produces all of them in everyone. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 129 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS As a body is one though it has many parts,
and all the parts of the body, though many, are one body,
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—C
so also Christ.
For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body,
Only Second Reading Option A and Gospel Option B given below.
whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free persons,
and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.
FIRST READING The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 2:1-11) SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled, Come, Holy Spirit, come!
they were all in one place together. And from your celestial home
And suddenly there came from the sky Shed a ray of light divine!
a noise like a strong driving wind, Come, Father of the poor!
and it filled the entire house in which they were. Come, source of all our store!
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, Come, within our bosoms shine.
which parted and came to rest on each one of them. You, of comforters the best;
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
and began to speak in different tongues, Sweet refreshment here below;
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim. In our labor, rest most sweet;
Grateful coolness in the heat;
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven Solace in the midst of woe.
staying in Jerusalem. O most blessed Light divine,
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, Shine within these hearts of yours,
but they were confused And our inmost being fill!
because each one heard them speaking in his own language. Where you are not, we have naught,
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, Nothing good in deed or thought,
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? Nothing free from taint of ill.
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language? Heal our wounds, our strength renew;
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, On our dryness pour your dew;
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Wash the stains of guilt away:
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, Bend the stubborn heart and will;
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
as well as travelers from Rome, Guide the steps that go astray.
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, On the faithful, who adore
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues And confess you, evermore
of the mighty acts of God.” In your sevenfold gift descend;
Give them virtue’s sure reward;
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Give them your salvation, Lord;
Give them joys that never end. Amen.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34) Alleluia.
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. ALLELUIA
or:
R. Alleluia. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Bless the LORD, O my soul! Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
the earth is full of your creatures;—R. GOSPEL
May the glory of the LORD endure forever; B (Jn 14:15-16, 23b-26)
may the LORD be glad in his works!
Pleasing to him be my theme; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
I will be glad in the LORD.—R.
JESUS said to his disciples:
If you take away their breath, they perish “If you love me, you will keep my commandments.
and return to their dust. And I will ask the Father,
When you send forth your spirit, they are created, and he will give you another Advocate to be with you always.
and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
“Whoever loves me will keep my word,
SECOND READING and my Father will love him,
and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him.
A (1 Cor 12:3b-7, 12-13) Those who do not love me do not keep my words;
yet the word you hear is not mine
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: but that of the Father who sent me.
BROTHERS and sisters: “I have told you this while I am with you.
No one can say, “Jesus is Lord, ” except by the Holy Spirit. The Advocate, the Holy Spirit whom the Father will send
There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit; in my name,
there are different forms of service but the same Lord; will teach you everything
there are different workings but the same God and remind you of all that I told you.”
who produces all of them in everyone.
To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
is given for some benefit.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 130 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS we are not debtors to the flesh,
to live according to the flesh.
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—C
For if you live according to the flesh, you will die,
but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body,
Only Second Reading Option B and Gospel Option A given below. you will live.
For those who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.
For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear,
FIRST READING but you received a Spirit of adoption,
through whom we cry, “Abba, Father!”
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 2:1-11) The Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit
that we are children of God,
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled, and if children, then heirs,
they were all in one place together. heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ,
And suddenly there came from the sky if only we suffer with him
a noise like a strong driving wind, so that we may also be glorified with him.
and it filled the entire house in which they were.
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
which parted and came to rest on each one of them.
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
and began to speak in different tongues,
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim. Come, Holy Spirit, come!
And from your celestial home
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven Shed a ray of light divine!
staying in Jerusalem. Come, Father of the poor!
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, Come, source of all our store!
but they were confused Come, within our bosoms shine.
because each one heard them speaking in his own language. You, of comforters the best;
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? Sweet refreshment here below;
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language? In our labor, rest most sweet;
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, Grateful coolness in the heat;
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Solace in the midst of woe.
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, O most blessed Light divine,
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, Shine within these hearts of yours,
as well as travelers from Rome, And our inmost being fill!
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, Where you are not, we have naught,
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues Nothing good in deed or thought,
of the mighty acts of God.” Nothing free from taint of ill.
Heal our wounds, our strength renew;
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. On our dryness pour your dew;
Wash the stains of guilt away:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34) Bend the stubborn heart and will;
Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. Guide the steps that go astray.
or: On the faithful, who adore
R. Alleluia. And confess you, evermore
In your sevenfold gift descend;
Bless the LORD, O my soul! Give them virtue’s sure reward;
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! Give them your salvation, Lord;
How manifold are your works, O LORD! Give them joys that never end. Amen.
the earth is full of your creatures;—R. Alleluia.
May the glory of the LORD endure forever; ALLELUIA
may the LORD be glad in his works!
Pleasing to him be my theme; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
I will be glad in the LORD.—R.
Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
If you take away their breath, they perish and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created, GOSPEL
and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
A (Jn 20:19-23)
SECOND READING
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
B (Rom 8:8-17)
ON the evening of that first day of the week,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: when the doors were locked, where the disciples were,
for fear of the Jews,
BROTHERS and sisters: Jesus came and stood in their midst
Those who are in the flesh cannot please God. and said to them, “Peace be with you.”
But you are not in the flesh; When he had said this, he showed them his hands and his side.
on the contrary, you are in the spirit, The disciples rejoiced when they saw the Lord.
if only the Spirit of God dwells in you. Jesus said to them again, “Peace be with you.
Whoever does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him. As the Father has sent me, so I send you.”
But if Christ is in you, And when he had said this, he breathed on them and said to them,
although the body is dead because of sin, “Receive the Holy Spirit.
the spirit is alive because of righteousness. Whose sins you forgive are forgiven them,
If the Spirit of the one who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, and whose sins you retain are retained.”
the one who raised Christ from the dead
will give life to your mortal bodies also, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
through his Spirit that dwells in you.
Consequently, brothers and sisters,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 131 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS For if you live according to the flesh, you will die,
but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body,
PENTECOST SUNDAY (MASS DURING THE DAY)—C
you will live.
Only Second Reading Option B and Gospel Option B given below. For those who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.
For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear,
but you received a Spirit of adoption,
through whom we cry, “Abba, Father!”
FIRST READING The Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit
that we are children of God,
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles (Acts 2:1-11) and if children, then heirs,
heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ,
WHEN the time for Pentecost was fulfilled, if only we suffer with him
they were all in one place together. so that we may also be glorified with him.
And suddenly there came from the sky
a noise like a strong driving wind, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and it filled the entire house in which they were.
Then there appeared to them tongues as of fire, SEQUENCE Veni, Sancte Spiritus
which parted and came to rest on each one of them.
And they were all filled with the Holy Spirit Come, Holy Spirit, come!
and began to speak in different tongues, And from your celestial home
as the Spirit enabled them to proclaim. Shed a ray of light divine!
Come, Father of the poor!
Now there were devout Jews from every nation under heaven Come, source of all our store!
staying in Jerusalem. Come, within our bosoms shine.
At this sound, they gathered in a large crowd, You, of comforters the best;
but they were confused You, the soul’s most welcome guest;
because each one heard them speaking in his own language. Sweet refreshment here below;
They were astounded, and in amazement they asked, In our labor, rest most sweet;
“Are not all these people who are speaking Galileans? Grateful coolness in the heat;
Then how does each of us hear them in his native language? Solace in the midst of woe.
We are Parthians, Medes, and Elamites, O most blessed Light divine,
inhabitants of Mesopotamia, Judea and Cappadocia, Shine within these hearts of yours,
Pontus and Asia, Phrygia and Pamphylia, And our inmost being fill!
Egypt and the districts of Libya near Cyrene, Where you are not, we have naught,
as well as travelers from Rome, Nothing good in deed or thought,
both Jews and converts to Judaism, Cretans and Arabs, Nothing free from taint of ill.
yet we hear them speaking in our own tongues Heal our wounds, our strength renew;
of the mighty acts of God.” On our dryness pour your dew;
Wash the stains of guilt away:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Bend the stubborn heart and will;
Melt the frozen, warm the chill;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 104:1, 24, 29-30, 31, 34) Guide the steps that go astray.
On the faithful, who adore
R. (cf. 30) Lord, send out your Spirit, and renew the face of the earth. And confess you, evermore
or: In your sevenfold gift descend;
R. Alleluia. Give them virtue’s sure reward;
Give them your salvation, Lord;
Bless the LORD, O my soul! Give them joys that never end. Amen.
O LORD, my God, you are great indeed! Alleluia.
How manifold are your works, O LORD!
the earth is full of your creatures;—R. ALLELUIA
May the glory of the LORD endure forever; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
may the LORD be glad in his works!
Pleasing to him be my theme; Come, Holy Spirit, fill the hearts of your faithful
I will be glad in the LORD.—R. and kindle in them the fire of your love.—R.
If you take away their breath, they perish GOSPEL
and return to their dust.
When you send forth your spirit, they are created, B (Jn 14:15-16, 23b-26)
and you renew the face of the earth.—R.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
SECOND READING
JESUS said to his disciples:
B (Rom 8:8-17) “If you love me, you will keep my commandments.
And I will ask the Father,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: and he will give you another Advocate to be with you always.
BROTHERS and sisters: “Whoever loves me will keep my word,
Those who are in the flesh cannot please God. and my Father will love him,
But you are not in the flesh; and we will come to him and make our dwelling with him.
on the contrary, you are in the spirit, Those who do not love me do not keep my words;
if only the Spirit of God dwells in you. yet the word you hear is not mine
Whoever does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him. but that of the Father who sent me.
But if Christ is in you,
although the body is dead because of sin, “I have told you this while I am with you.
the spirit is alive because of righteousness. The Advocate, the Holy Spirit whom the Father will send
If the Spirit of the one who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you, in my name,
the one who raised Christ from the dead will teach you everything
will give life to your mortal bodies also, and remind you of all that I told you.”
through his Spirit that dwells in you.
Consequently, brothers and sisters, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
we are not debtors to the flesh,
to live according to the flesh.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 132 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS To those who accepted him,
SECOND SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A he gave power to become children of God.—R.
GOSPEL (Jn 1:29-34)
FIRST READING (Is 49:3, 5-6)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
A reading from the book of the prophet Isaiah:
JOHN the Baptist saw Jesus coming toward him and said,
THE LORD said to me: You are my servant, “Behold, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin of the world.
Israel, through whom I show my glory. He is the one of whom I said,
Now the LORD has spoken ‘A man is coming after me who ranks ahead of me
who formed me as his servant from the womb, because he existed before me.’
that Jacob may be brought back to him I did not know him,
and Israel gathered to him; but the reason why I came baptizing with water
and I am made glorious in the sight of the LORD, was that he might be made known to Israel.”
and my God is now my strength! John testified further, saying,
It is too little, the LORD says, for you to be my servant, “I saw the Spirit come down like a dove from heaven
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and remain upon him.
and restore the survivors of Israel; I did not know him,
I will make you a light to the nations, but the one who sent me to baptize with water told me,
that my salvation may reach to the ends of the earth. ‘On whomever you see the Spirit come down and remain,
he is the one who will baptize with the Holy Spirit.’
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Now I have seen and testified that he is the Son of God.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 40:2, 4, 7-8, 8-9, 10) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
R. (8a and 9a) Here am I, Lord; I come to do your will.
I have waited, waited for the LORD,
and he stooped toward me and heard my cry.
And he put a new song into my mouth,
a hymn to our God.—R.
Sacrifice or offering you wished not,
but ears open to obedience you gave me.
Holocausts or sin-offerings you sought not;
then said I, “Behold I come.”—R.
“In the written scroll it is prescribed for me,
to do your will, O my God, is my delight,
And your law is within my heart!”—R.
I announced your justice in the vast assembly;
I did not restrain my lips, as you, O LORD, know.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 1:1-3)
The beginning of the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
PAUL, called to be an apostle of Christ Jesus by the will of God,
and Sosthenes our brother,
to the church of God that is in Corinth,
to you who have been sanctified in Christ Jesus,
called to be holy,
with all those everywhere who call upon the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ, their Lord and ours.
Grace to you and peace from God our Father
and the Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (John 1:14a, 12a)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
The Word of God became flesh and dwelt among us.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 133 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS But whoever is joined to the Lord becomes one Spirit with him.
SECOND SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B Avoid immorality.
Every other sin a person commits is outside the body,
but the immoral person sins against his own body.
FIRST READING (1 Sam 3:3b-10, 19) Do you not know that your body
is a temple of the Holy Spirit within you,
A reading from the first Book of Samuel: whom you have from God, and that you are not your own?
For you have been purchased at a price.
SAMUEL was sleeping in the temple of the LORD Therefore glorify God in your body.
where the ark of God was.
The LORD called to Samuel, who answered, “Here I am.” The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Samuel ran to Eli and said, “Here I am. You called me.”
“I did not call you,” Eli said. “Go back to sleep.” ALLELUIA (John 1:41, 17b)
So he went back to sleep.
Again the LORD called Samuel, who rose and went to Eli. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
“Here I am,” he said. “You called me.”
But Eli answered, “I did not call you, my son. Go back to sleep.” We have found the Messiah:
Jesus Christ, who brings us truth and grace.—R.
At that time Samuel was not familiar with the LORD,
because the LORD had not revealed anything to him as yet. GOSPEL (Jn 1:35-42)
The LORD called Samuel again, for the third time.
Getting up and going to Eli, he said, “Here I am. You called me.” + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
Then Eli understood that the LORD was calling the youth.
So he said to Samuel, “Go to sleep, and if you are called, reply, JOHN was standing with two of his disciples,
Speak, LORD, for your servant is listening.” and as he watched Jesus walk by, he said,
When Samuel went to sleep in his place, “Behold, the Lamb of God.”
the LORD came and revealed his presence, The two disciples heard what he said and followed Jesus.
calling out as before, “Samuel, Samuel!” Jesus turned and saw them following him and said to them,
Samuel answered, “Speak, for your servant is listening.” “What are you looking for?”
They said to him, “Rabbi”—which translated means Teacher—,
Samuel grew up, and the LORD was with him, “where are you staying?”
not permitting any word of his to be without effect. He said to them, “Come, and you will see.”
So they went and saw where Jesus was staying,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and they stayed with him that day.
It was about four in the afternoon.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 40:2, 4, 7-8, 8-9, 10) Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter,
was one of the two who heard John and followed Jesus.
R. (8a and 9a) Here am I, Lord; I come to do your will. He first found his own brother Simon and told him,
“We have found the Messiah”—which is translated Christ—.
I have waited, waited for the LORD, Then he brought him to Jesus.
and he stooped toward me and heard my cry. Jesus looked at him and said,
And he put a new song into my mouth, “You are Simon the son of John;
a hymn to our God.—R. you will be called Cephas”—which is translated Peter.
Sacrifice or offering you wished not, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
but ears open to obedience you gave me.
Holocausts or sin-offerings you sought not;
then said I, “Behold I come.”—R.
“In the written scroll it is prescribed for me,
to do your will, O my God, is my delight,
And your law is within my heart!”—R.
I announced your justice in the vast assembly;
I did not restrain my lips, as you, O LORD, know.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 6:13c-15a, 17-20)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
The body is not for immorality, but for the Lord,
and the Lord is for the body;
God raised the Lord and will also raise us by his power.
Do you not know that your bodies are members of Christ?
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 134 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS same Spirit;
SECOND SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C to another, faith by the same Spirit;
to another, gifts of healing by the one Spirit;
to another, mighty deeds;
FIRST READING (Is 62:1-5) to another, prophecy;
to another, discernment of spirits;
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: to another, varieties of tongues;
to another, interpretation of tongues.
FOR Zion’s sake I will not be silent, But one and the same Spirit produces all of these,
for Jerusalem’s sake I will not be quiet, distributing them individually to each person as he wishes.
until her vindication shines forth like the dawn
and her victory like a burning torch. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Nations shall behold your vindication, ALLELUIA (cf. 2 Thes 2:14)
and all the kings your glory;
you shall be called by a new name R. Alleluia, alleluia.
pronounced by the mouth of the LORD.
You shall be a glorious crown in the hand of the LORD, God has called us through the Gospel
a royal diadem held by your God. to possess the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.—R.
No more shall people call you “Forsaken,”
or your land “Desolate,” GOSPEL (Jn 2:1-11)
but you shall be called “My Delight,”
and your land “Espoused.” + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
For the LORD delights in you
and makes your land his spouse. THERE was a wedding at Cana in Galilee,
As a young man marries a virgin, and the mother of Jesus was there.
your Builder shall marry you; Jesus and his disciples were also invited to the wedding.
and as a bridegroom rejoices in his bride When the wine ran short,
so shall your God rejoice in you. the mother of Jesus said to him,
“They have no wine.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. And Jesus said to her,
“Woman, how does your concern affect me?
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 96:1-2, 2-3, 7-8, 9-10) My hour has not yet come.”
His mother said to the servers,
R. (3) Proclaim his marvelous deeds to all the nations. “Do whatever he tells you.”
Now there were six stone water jars there for Jewish ceremonial washings,
Sing to the LORD a new song; each holding twenty to thirty gallons.
sing to the LORD, all you lands. Jesus told them,
Sing to the LORD; bless his name.—R. “Fill the jars with water.”
So they filled them to the brim.
Announce his salvation, day after day. Then he told them,
Tell his glory among the nations; “Draw some out now and take it to the headwaiter.”
Among all peoples, his wondrous deeds.—R. So they took it.
And when the headwaiter tasted the water that had become wine,
Give to the LORD, you families of nations, without knowing where it came from
give to the LORD glory and praise; (although the servers who had drawn the water knew),
give to the LORD the glory due his name!—R. the headwaiter called the bridegroom and said to him,
“Everyone serves good wine first,
Worship the LORD in holy attire. and then when people have drunk freely, an inferior one;
Tremble before him, all the earth; but you have kept the good wine until now.”
Say among the nations: The LORD is king. Jesus did this as the beginning of his signs at Cana in Galilee
He governs the peoples with equity.—R. and so revealed his glory,
and his disciples began to believe in him.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 12:4-11)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
There are different kinds of spiritual gifts but the same Spirit;
there are different forms of service but the same Lord;
there are different workings but the same God
who produces all of them in everyone.
To each individual the manifestation of the Spirit
is given for some benefit.
To one is given through the Spirit the expression of wisdom;
to another, the expression of knowledge according to the
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 135 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Was Paul crucified for you?
THIRD SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A Or were you baptized in the name of Paul?
For Christ did not send me to baptize but to preach the gospel,
and not with the wisdom of human eloquence,
FIRST READING (Is 8:23-9:3) so that the cross of Christ might not be emptied of its meaning.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST the Lord degraded the land of Zebulun ALLELUIA (cf. Matthew 4:23)
and the land of Naphtali;
but in the end he has glorified the seaward road, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
the land west of the Jordan,
the District of the Gentiles. Jesus proclaimed the Gospel of the kingdom
and cured every disease among the people.—R.
Anguish has taken wing, dispelled is darkness:
for there is no gloom where but now there was distress. GOSPEL (Mt 4:12-23 or 4:12-17)
The people who walked in darkness + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
have seen a great light;
upon those who dwelt in the land of gloom a light has shone. [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
You have brought them abundant joy
and great rejoicing, [ WHEN Jesus heard that John had been arrested,
as they rejoice before you as at the harvest, he withdrew to Galilee.
as people make merry when dividing spoils. He left Nazareth and went to live in Capernaum by the sea,
For the yoke that burdened them, in the region of Zebulun and Naphtali,
the pole on their shoulder, that what had been said through Isaiah the prophet
and the rod of their taskmaster might be fulfilled:
you have smashed, as on the day of Midian. Land of Zebulun and land of Naphtali,
the way to the sea, beyond the Jordan,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Galilee of the Gentiles,
the people who sit in darkness have seen a great light,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 27:1, 4, 13-14) on those dwelling in a land overshadowed by death
light has arisen.
R. (1a) The Lord is my light and my salvation. From that time on, Jesus began to preach and say,
"Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand." ]
The LORD is my light and my salvation; As he was walking by the Sea of Galilee, he saw two brothers,
whom should I fear? Simon who is called Peter, and his brother Andrew,
The LORD is my life's refuge; casting a net into the sea; they were fishermen.
of whom should I be afraid?—R. He said to them,
"Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men."
One thing I ask of the LORD; At once they left their nets and followed him.
this I seek: He walked along from there and saw two other brothers,
To dwell in the house of the LORD James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John.
all the days of my life, They were in a boat, with their father Zebedee, mending their nets.
That I may gaze on the loveliness of the LORD He called them, and immediately they left their boat and their father
and contemplate his temple.—R. and followed him.
He went around all of Galilee,
I believe that I shall see the bounty of the LORD teaching in their synagogues, proclaiming the gospel of the kingdom,
in the land of the living. and curing every disease and illness among the people.
Wait for the LORD with courage;
be stouthearted, and wait for the LORD.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 1:10-13, 17)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
I URGE you, brothers and sisters, in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ,
that all of you agree in what you say,
and that there be no divisions among you,
but that you be united in the same mind and in the same purpose.
For it has been reported to me about you, my brothers and sisters,
by Chloe's people, that there are rivalries among you.
I mean that each of you is saying,
"I belong to Paul," or "I belong to Apollos,"
or "I belong to Cephas," or "I belong to Christ."
Is Christ divided?
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 136 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Repent and believe in the Gospel.—R.
THIRD SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
GOSPEL (Mk 1:14-20)
FIRST READING (Jon 3:1-5, 10) + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jonah: AFTER John had been arrested,
Jesus came to Galilee proclaiming the Gospel of God:
THE word of the LORD came to Jonah, saying: "This is the time of fulfillment.
"Set out for the great city of Nineveh, The Kingdom of God is at hand.
and announce to it the message that I will tell you." Repent, and believe in the Gospel."
So Jonah made ready and went to Nineveh,
according to the LORD'S bidding. As he passed by the Sea of Galilee,
Now Nineveh was an enormously large city; he saw Simon and his brother Andrew casting their nets into the sea;
it took three days to go through it. they were fishermen.
Jonah began his journey through the city, Jesus said to them,
and had gone but a single day's walk announcing, "Come after me, and I will make you fishers of men."
"Forty days more and Nineveh shall be destroyed," Then they left their nets and followed him.
when the people of Nineveh believed God; He walked along a little farther
they proclaimed a fast and saw James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John.
and all of them, great and small, put on sackcloth. They too were in a boat mending their nets.
Then he called them.
When God saw by their actions how they turned from their evil way, So they left their father Zebedee in the boat
he repented of the evil that he had threatened to do to them; along with the hired men and followed him.
he did not carry it out.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 25:4-5, 6-7, 8-9)
R. (4a) Teach me your ways, O Lord.
Your ways, O LORD, make known to me;
teach me your paths,
Guide me in your truth and teach me,
for you are God my savior.—R.
Remember that your compassion, O LORD,
and your love are from of old.
In your kindness remember me,
because of your goodness, O LORD.—R.
Good and upright is the LORD;
thus he shows sinners the way.
He guides the humble to justice
and teaches the humble his way.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 7:29-31)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
I TELL you, brothers and sisters, the time is running out.
From now on, let those having wives act as not having them,
those weeping as not weeping,
those rejoicing as not rejoicing,
those buying as not owning,
those using the world as not using it fully.
For the world in its present form is passing away.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Mark 1:15)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
The kingdom of God is at hand.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 137 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS If a foot should say,
"Because I am not a hand I do not belong to the body,"
THIRD SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
it does not for this reason belong any less to the body.
Or if an ear should say,
"Because I am not an eye I do not belong to the body,"
FIRST READING (Neh 8:2-4a, 5-6, 8-10) it does not for this reason belong any less to the body.
If the whole body were an eye, where would the hearing be?
A reading from the Book of Nehemiah: If the whole body were hearing, where would the sense of smell be?
But as it is, God placed the parts,
EZRA the priest brought the law before the assembly, each one of them, in the body as he intended.
which consisted of men, women, If they were all one part, where would the body be?
and those children old enough to understand. But as it is, there are many parts, yet one body.
Standing at one end of the open place that was before the Water Gate, The eye cannot say to the hand, "I do not need you,"
he read out of the book from daybreak till midday, nor again the head to the feet, "I do not need you."
in the presence of the men, the women, Indeed, the parts of the body that seem to be weaker
and those children old enough to understand; are all the more necessary,
and all the people listened attentively to the book of the law. and those parts of the body that we consider less honorable
Ezra the scribe stood on a wooden platform we surround with greater honor,
that had been made for the occasion. and our less presentable parts are treated with greater propriety,
He opened the scroll whereas our more presentable parts do not need this.
so that all the people might see it But God has so constructed the body
—for he was standing higher up than any of the people—; as to give greater honor to a part that is without it,
and, as he opened it, all the people rose. so that there may be no division in the body,
Ezra blessed the LORD, the great God, but that the parts may have the same concern for one another.
and all the people, their hands raised high, answered, If one part suffers, all the parts suffer with it;
"Amen, amen!" if one part is honored, all the parts share its joy.
Then they bowed down and prostrated themselves before the LORD,
their faces to the ground. Now [ you are Christ's body, and individually parts of it. ]
Ezra read plainly from the book of the law of God, Some people God has designated in the church
interpreting it so that all could understand what was read. to be, first, apostles; second, prophets; third, teachers;
Then Nehemiah, that is, His Excellency, and Ezra the priest-scribe then, mighty deeds;
and the Levites who were instructing the people then gifts of healing, assistance, administration,
said to all the people: and varieties of tongues.
"Today is holy to the LORD your God. Are all apostles? Are all prophets? Are all teachers?
Do not be sad, and do not weep"— Do all work mighty deeds? Do all have gifts of healing?
for all the people were weeping as they heard the words of the law. Do all speak in tongues? Do all interpret?
He said further: "Go, eat rich foods and drink sweet drinks,
and allot portions to those who had nothing prepared; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
for today is holy to our LORD.
Do not be saddened this day, ALLELUIA (cf. Luke 4:18)
for rejoicing in the LORD must be your strength!"
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
The Lord sent me to bring glad tidings to the poor,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM Psalm 19:8, 9, 10, 15 and to proclaim liberty to captives.
R. (cf. John 6:63c) Your words, Lord, are Spirit and life. GOSPEL (Lk 1:1-4; 4:14-21)
The law of the LORD is perfect, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
refreshing the soul;
The decree of the LORD is trustworthy, SINCE many have undertaken to compile a narrative of the events
giving wisdom to the simple.—R. that have been fulfilled among us,
just as those who were eyewitnesses from the beginning
The precepts of the LORD are right, and ministers of the word have handed them down to us,
rejoicing the heart; I too have decided,
The command of the LORD is clear, after investigating everything accurately anew,
enlightening the eye.—R. to write it down in an orderly sequence for you,
most excellent Theophilus,
The fear of the LORD is pure, so that you may realize the certainty of the teachings
enduring forever; you have received.
The ordinances of the LORD are true, Jesus returned to Galilee in the power of the Spirit,
all of them just.—R. and news of him spread throughout the whole region.
He taught in their synagogues and was praised by all.
Let the words of my mouth and the thought of my heart He came to Nazareth, where he had grown up,
find favor before you, and went according to his custom
O LORD, my rock and my redeemer.—R. into the synagogue on the sabbath day.
He stood up to read and was handed a scroll of the prophet Isaiah.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 12:12-30 or 12:12-14, 27) He unrolled the scroll and found the passage where it was written:
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me,
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: because he has anointed me
to bring glad tidings to the poor.
[ Shorter form in brackets. ] He has sent me to proclaim liberty to captives
and recovery of sight to the blind,
[ BROTHERS and sisters: to let the oppressed go free,
As a body is one though it has many parts, and to proclaim a year acceptable to the Lord.
and all the parts of the body, though many, are one body, Rolling up the scroll, he handed it back to the attendant and sat down,
so also Christ. and the eyes of all in the synagogue looked intently at him.
For in one Spirit we were all baptized into one body, He said to them,
whether Jews or Greeks, slaves or free persons, "Today this Scripture passage is fulfilled in your hearing."
and we were all given to drink of one Spirit.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Now the body is not a single part, but many. ]
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 138 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS as well as righteousness, sanctification, and redemption,
FOURTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A so that, as it is written,
“Whoever boasts, should boast in the Lord.”
FIRST READING (Zep 2:3; 3:12-13) The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Zephaniah: ALLELUIA (Matthew 5:12a)
SEEK the LORD, all you humble of the earth, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
who have observed his law;
seek justice, seek humility; Rejoice and be glad;
perhaps you may be sheltered your reward will be great in heaven.—R.
on the day of the LORD’S anger.
GOSPEL (Mt 5:1-12a)
But I will leave as a remnant in your midst
a people humble and lowly, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
who shall take refuge in the name of the LORD:
the remnant of Israel. WHEN Jesus saw the crowds, he went up the mountain,
They shall do no wrong and after he had sat down, his disciples came to him.
and speak no lies; He began to teach them, saying:
nor shall there be found in their mouths “Blessed are the poor in spirit,
a deceitful tongue; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
they shall pasture and couch their flocks Blessed are they who mourn,
with none to disturb them. for they will be comforted.
Blessed are the meek,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. for they will inherit the land.
Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 146:6-7, 8-9, 9-10) for they will be satisfied.
Blessed are the merciful,
R. (Matthew 5:3) Blessed the poor in spirit; the kingdom of heaven is for they will be shown mercy.
theirs! Blessed are the clean of heart,
or: for they will see God.
R. Alleluia. Blessed are the peacemakers,
for they will be called children of God.
The LORD keeps faith forever, Blessed are they who are persecuted for the sake of
secures justice for the oppressed, righteousness,
gives food to the hungry. for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.
The LORD sets captives free.—R. Blessed are you when they insult you and persecute you
and utter every kind of evil against you falsely because of me.
The LORD gives sight to the blind; Rejoice and be glad,
the LORD raises up those who were bowed down. for your reward will be great in heaven.”
The LORD loves the just;
the LORD protects strangers.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The fatherless and the widow the LORD sustains,
but the way of the wicked he thwarts.
The LORD shall reign forever;
your God, O Zion, through all generations.
Alleluia.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 1:26-31)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
CONSIDER your own calling, brothers and sisters.
Not many of you were wise by human standards,
not many were powerful,
not many were of noble birth.
Rather, God chose the foolish of the world to shame the wise,
and God chose the weak of the world to shame the strong,
and God chose the lowly and despised of the world,
those who count for nothing,
to reduce to nothing those who are something,
so that no human being might boast before God.
It is due to him that you are in Christ Jesus,
who became for us wisdom from God,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 139 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and adherence to the Lord without distraction.
FOURTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Deut 18:15-20) ALLELUIA (Matthew 4:16)
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
MOSES spoke to all the people, saying: The people who sit in darkness have seen a great light;
“A prophet like me will the LORD, your God, raise up for you on those dwelling in a land overshadowed by death,
from among your own kin; light has arisen.—R.
to him you shall listen.
This is exactly what you requested of the LORD, your God, at Horeb GOSPEL (Mk 1:21-28)
on the day of the assembly, when you said,
‘Let us not again hear the voice of the LORD, our God, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
nor see this great fire any more, lest we die.’
And the LORD said to me, ‘This was well said. THEN they came to Capernaum,
I will raise up for them a prophet like you from among their kin, and on the sabbath Jesus entered the synagogue and taught.
and will put my words into his mouth; The people were astonished at his teaching,
he shall tell them all that I command him.’” for he taught them as one having authority and not as the scribes.
Whoever will not listen to my words which he speaks in my name, In their synagogue was a man with an unclean spirit;
I myself will make him answer for it. he cried out, “What have you to do with us, Jesus of Nazareth?
But if a prophet presumes to speak in my name Have you come to destroy us?
an oracle that I have not commanded him to speak, I know who you are—the Holy One of God!”
or speaks in the name of other gods, he shall die.” Jesus rebuked him and said,
“Quiet! Come out of him!”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The unclean spirit convulsed him and with a loud cry came out of him.
All were amazed and asked one another,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 95:1-2, 6-7, 7-9) “What is this?
A new teaching with authority.
R. (8) If today you hear his voice, harden not your hearts. He commands even the unclean spirits and they obey him.”
His fame spread everywhere throughout the whole region of Galilee.
Come, let us sing joyfully to the LORD;
let us acclaim the rock of our salvation. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving;
let us joyfully sing psalms to him.—R.
Come, let us bow down in worship;
let us kneel before the LORD who made us.
For he is our God,
and we are the people he shepherds, the flock he guides.—R.
Oh, that today you would hear his voice:
“Harden not your hearts as at Meribah,
as in the day of Massah in the desert,
Where your fathers tempted me;
they tested me though they had seen my works.”—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 7:32-35)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
I should like you to be free of anxieties.
An unmarried man is anxious about the things of the Lord,
how he may please the Lord.
But a married man is anxious about the things of the world,
how he may please his wife, and he is divided.
An unmarried woman or a virgin is anxious about the things of the Lord,
so that she may be holy in both body and spirit.
A married woman, on the other hand,
is anxious about the things of the world,
how she may please her husband.
I am telling you this for your own benefit,
not to impose a restraint upon you,
but for the sake of propriety
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 140 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and if I hand my body over so that I may boast,
FOURTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C but do not have love, I gain nothing.
[ Love is patient, love is kind.
It is not jealous, it is not pompous,
FIRST READING (Jer 1:4-5, 17-19)
It is not inflated, it is not rude,
it does not seek its own interests,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah:
it is not quick-tempered, it does not brood over injury,
it does not rejoice over wrongdoing
THE word of the LORD came to me, saying:
but rejoices with the truth.
Before I formed you in the womb I knew you,
It bears all things, believes all things,
before you were born I dedicated you,
hopes all things, endures all things.
a prophet to the nations I appointed you.
Love never fails.
But do you gird your loins;
If there are prophecies, they will be brought to nothing;
stand up and tell them
if tongues, they will cease;
all that I command you.
if knowledge, it will be brought to nothing.
Be not crushed on their account,
For we know partially and we prophesy partially,
as though I would leave you crushed before them;
but when the perfect comes, the partial will pass away.
for it is I this day
When I was a child, I used to talk as a child,
who have made you a fortified city,
think as a child, reason as a child;
a pillar of iron, a wall of brass,
when I became a man, I put aside childish things.
against the whole land:
At present we see indistinctly, as in a mirror,
against Judah’s kings and princes,
but then face to face.
against its priests and people.
At present I know partially;
They will fight against you but not prevail over you,
then I shall know fully, as I am fully known.
for I am with you to deliver you, says the LORD.
So faith, hope, love remain, these three;
but the greatest of these is love. ]
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 71:1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 15-17)
ALLELUIA (Luke 4:18)
R. (cf. 15ab) I will sing of your salvation.
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
In you, O LORD, I take refuge;
let me never be put to shame.
The Lord sent me to bring glad tidings to the poor,
In your justice rescue me, and deliver me;
to proclaim liberty to captives.—R.
incline your ear to me, and save me.—R.
GOSPEL (Lk 4:21-30)
Be my rock of refuge,
a stronghold to give me safety,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
for you are my rock and my fortress.
O my God, rescue me from the hand of the wicked.—R.
JESUS began speaking in the synagogue, saying:
“Today this Scripture passage is fulfilled in your hearing.”
For you are my hope, O Lord;
And all spoke highly of him
my trust, O God, from my youth.
and were amazed at the gracious words that came from his mouth.
On you I depend from birth;
They also asked, “Isn’t this the son of Joseph?”
from my mother’s womb you are my strength.—R.
He said to them, “Surely you will quote me this proverb,
‘Physician, cure yourself,’ and say,
My mouth shall declare your justice,
‘Do here in your native place
day by day your salvation.
the things that we heard were done in Capernaum.’”
O God, you have taught me from my youth,
And he said, “Amen, I say to you,
and till the present I proclaim your wondrous deeds.—R.
no prophet is accepted in his own native place.
Indeed, I tell you,
SECOND READING (1 Cor 12:31-13:13 or 13:4-13)
there were many widows in Israel in the days of Elijah
when the sky was closed for three and a half years
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
and a severe famine spread over the entire land.
It was to none of these that Elijah was sent,
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
but only to a widow in Zarephath in the land of Sidon.
Again, there were many lepers in Israel
[ BROTHERS and sisters: ]
during the time of Elisha the prophet;
Strive eagerly for the greatest spiritual gifts.
yet not one of them was cleansed, but only Naaman the Syrian.”
But I shall show you a still more excellent way.
When the people in the synagogue heard this,
they were all filled with fury.
If I speak in human and angelic tongues,
They rose up, drove him out of the town,
but do not have love,
and led him to the brow of the hill
I am a resounding gong or a clashing cymbal.
on which their town had been built,
And if I have the gift of prophecy,
to hurl him down headlong.
and comprehend all mysteries and all knowledge;
But Jesus passed through the midst of them and went away.
if I have all faith so as to move mountains,
but do not have love, I am nothing.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
If I give away everything I own,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 141 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (John 8:12)
FIFTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Is 58:7-10) I am the light of the world, says the Lord;
whoever follows me will have the light of life.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
GOSPEL (Mt 5:13-16)
THUS says the LORD:
Share your bread with the hungry, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
shelter the oppressed and the homeless;
clothe the naked when you see them, JESUS said to his disciples:
and do not turn your back on your own. “You are the salt of the earth.
Then your light shall break forth like the dawn, But if salt loses its taste, with what can it be seasoned?
and your wound shall quickly be healed; It is no longer good for anything
your vindication shall go before you, but to be thrown out and trampled underfoot.
and the glory of the LORD shall be your rear guard. You are the light of the world.
Then you shall call, and the LORD will answer, A city set on a mountain cannot be hidden.
you shall cry for help, and he will say: Here I am! Nor do they light a lamp and then put it under a bushel basket;
If you remove from your midst it is set on a lampstand,
oppression, false accusation and malicious speech; where it gives light to all in the house.
if you bestow your bread on the hungry Just so, your light must shine before others,
and satisfy the afflicted; that they may see your good deeds
then light shall rise for you in the darkness, and glorify your heavenly Father.”
and the gloom shall become for you like midday.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 112:4-5, 6-7, 8-9)
R. (4a) The just man is a light in darkness to the upright.
or:
R. Alleluia.
Light shines through the darkness for the upright;
he is gracious and merciful and just.
Well for the man who is gracious and lends,
who conducts his affairs with justice.—R.
He shall never be moved;
the just one shall be in everlasting remembrance.
An evil report he shall not fear;
his heart is firm, trusting in the LORD.—R.
His heart is steadfast; he shall not fear.
Lavishly he gives to the poor;
His justice shall endure forever;
his horn shall be exalted in glory.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 2:1-5)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
WHEN I came to you, brothers and sisters,
proclaiming the mystery of God,
I did not come with sublimity of words or of wisdom.
For I resolved to know nothing while I was with you
except Jesus Christ, and him crucified.
I came to you in weakness and fear and much trembling,
and my message and my proclamation
were not with persuasive words of wisdom,
but with a demonstration of Spirit and power,
so that your faith might rest not on human wisdom
but on the power of God.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 142 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS All this I do for the sake of the gospel,
FIFTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B so that I too may have a share in it.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Job 7:1-4, 6-7)
ALLELUIA (Matthew 8:17)
A reading from the Book of Job:
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
JOB spoke, saying:
Is not man’s life on earth a drudgery? Christ took away our infirmities
Are not his days those of hirelings? and bore our diseases.—R.
He is a slave who longs for the shade,
a hireling who waits for his wages. GOSPEL (Mk 1:29-39)
So I have been assigned months of misery,
and troubled nights have been allotted to me. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
If in bed I say, “When shall I arise?”
then the night drags on; ON leaving the synagogue
I am filled with restlessness until the dawn. Jesus entered the house of Simon and Andrew with James and John.
My days are swifter than a weaver’s shuttle; Simon’s mother-in-law lay sick with a fever.
they come to an end without hope. They immediately told him about her.
Remember that my life is like the wind; He approached, grasped her hand, and helped her up.
I shall not see happiness again. Then the fever left her and she waited on them.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. When it was evening, after sunset,
they brought to him all who were ill or possessed by demons.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 147:1-2, 3-4, 5-6) The whole town was gathered at the door.
He cured many who were sick with various diseases,
R. (cf. 3a) Praise the Lord, who heals the brokenhearted. and he drove out many demons,
or: not permitting them to speak because they knew him.
R. Alleluia.
Rising very early before dawn, he left
Praise the LORD, for he is good; and went off to a deserted place, where he prayed.
sing praise to our God, for he is gracious; Simon and those who were with him pursued him
it is fitting to praise him. and on finding him said, “Everyone is looking for you.”
The LORD rebuilds Jerusalem; He told them, “Let us go on to the nearby villages
the dispersed of Israel he gathers.—R. that I may preach there also.
For this purpose have I come.”
He heals the brokenhearted So he went into their synagogues,
and binds up their wounds. preaching and driving out demons throughout the whole of Galilee.
He tells the number of the stars;
he calls each by name.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Great is our Lord and mighty in power;
to his wisdom there is no limit.
The LORD sustains the lowly;
the wicked he casts to the ground.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 9:16-19, 22-23)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
If I preach the gospel, this is no reason for me to boast,
for an obligation has been imposed on me,
and woe to me if I do not preach it!
If I do so willingly, I have a recompense,
but if unwillingly, then I have been entrusted with a stewardship.
What then is my recompense?
That, when I preach,
I offer the gospel free of charge
so as not to make full use of my right in the gospel.
Although I am free in regard to all,
I have made myself a slave to all
so as to win over as many as possible.
To the weak I became weak, to win over the weak.
I have become all things to all, to save at least some.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 143 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Through it you are also being saved,
FIFTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C if you hold fast to the word I preached to you,
unless you believed in vain.
For [ I handed on to you as of first importance what I also received:
that Christ died for our sins
FIRST READING (Is 6:1-2a, 3-8)
in accordance with the Scriptures;
that he was buried;
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
that he was raised on the third day
in accordance with the Scriptures;
IN the year King Uzziah died,
that he appeared to Cephas, then to the Twelve.
I saw the Lord seated on a high and lofty throne,
After that, Christ appeared to more
with the train of his garment filling the temple.
than five hundred brothers at once,
Seraphim were stationed above.
most of whom are still living,
though some have fallen asleep.
They cried one to the other,
After that he appeared to James,
“Holy, holy, holy is the LORD of hosts!
then to all the apostles.
All the earth is filled with his glory!”
Last of all, as to one born abnormally,
At the sound of that cry, the frame of the door shook
he appeared to me. ]
and the house was filled with smoke.
For I am the least of the apostles,
not fit to be called an apostle,
Then I said, “Woe is me, I am doomed!
because I persecuted the church of God.
For I am a man of unclean lips,
But by the grace of God I am what I am,
living among a people of unclean lips;
and his grace to me has not been ineffective.
yet my eyes have seen the King, the LORD of hosts!”
Indeed, I have toiled harder than all of them;
Then one of the seraphim flew to me,
not I, however, but the grace of God that is with me.
holding an ember that he had taken with tongs from the altar.
[ Therefore, whether it be I or they,
so we preach and so you believed. ]
He touched my mouth with it, and said,
“See, now that this has touched your lips,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
your wickedness is removed, your sin purged.”
ALLELUIA (Matthew 4:19)
Then I heard the voice of the Lord saying,
“Whom shall I send? Who will go for us?”
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
“Here I am,” I said; “send me!”
Come after me
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and I will make you fishers of men.—R.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 138:1-2, 2-3, 4-5, 7-8)
GOSPEL (Lk 5:1-11)
R. (1c) In the sight of the angels I will sing your praises, Lord.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
I will give thanks to you, O LORD, with all my heart,
WHILE the crowd was pressing in on Jesus and listening
for you have heard the words of my mouth;
to the word of God,
in the presence of the angels I will sing your praise;
he was standing by the Lake of Gennesaret.
I will worship at your holy temple
He saw two boats there alongside the lake;
and give thanks to your name.—R.
the fishermen had disembarked and were washing their nets.
Getting into one of the boats, the one belonging to Simon,
Because of your kindness and your truth;
he asked him to put out a short distance from the shore.
for you have made great above all things
Then he sat down and taught the crowds from the boat.
your name and your promise.
After he had finished speaking, he said to Simon,
When I called, you answered me;
“Put out into deep water and lower your nets for a catch.”
you built up strength within me.—R.
Simon said in reply,
“Master, we have worked hard all night and have caught nothing,
All the kings of the earth shall give thanks to you, O LORD,
but at your command I will lower the nets.”
when they hear the words of your mouth;
When they had done this, they caught a great number of fish
and they shall sing of the ways of the LORD:
and their nets were tearing.
“Great is the glory of the LORD.”—R.
They signaled to their partners in the other boat
to come to help them.
Your right hand saves me.
They came and filled both boats
The LORD will complete what he has done for me;
so that the boats were in danger of sinking.
your kindness, O LORD, endures forever;
When Simon Peter saw this, he fell at the knees of Jesus and said,
forsake not the work of your hands.—R.
“Depart from me, Lord, for I am a sinful man.”
For astonishment at the catch of fish they had made seized him
SECOND READING (1 Cor 15:1-11 or 15:3-8, 11)
and all those with him,
and likewise James and John, the sons of Zebedee,
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
who were partners of Simon.
Jesus said to Simon, “Do not be afraid;
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
from now on you will be catching men.”
When they brought their boats to the shore,
I AM reminding you, [ brothers and sisters, ]
of the gospel I preached to you,
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
which you indeed received and in which you also stand.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 144 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Blessed are you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth;
you have revealed to little ones the mysteries of the kingdom.—R.
SIXTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
GOSPEL (Mt 5:17-37 or 5:20-22a, 27-28, 33-34a, 37)
FIRST READING (Sir 15:15-20) + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
A reading from the Book of Sirach: [ JESUS said to his disciples: ]
“Do not think that I have come to abolish the law or the prophets.
IF you choose you can keep the commandments, they will save you; I have come not to abolish but to fulfill.
if you trust in God, you too shall live; Amen, I say to you, until heaven and earth pass away,
he has set before you fire and water not the smallest letter or the smallest part of a letter
to whichever you choose, stretch forth your hand. will pass from the law,
Before man are life and death, good and evil, until all things have taken place.
whichever he chooses shall be given him. Therefore, whoever breaks one of the least of these commandments
Immense is the wisdom of the Lord; and teaches others to do so
he is mighty in power, and all-seeing. will be called least in the kingdom of heaven.
The eyes of God are on those who fear him; But whoever obeys and teaches these commandments
he understands mans every deed. will be called greatest in the kingdom of heaven.
No one does he command to act unjustly, [ I tell you, unless your righteousness surpasses
to none does he give license to sin. that of the scribes and Pharisees,
you will not enter the kingdom of heaven.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. “You have heard that it was said to your ancestors,
You shall not kill; and whoever kills will be liable to judgment.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 119:1-2, 4-5, 17-18, 33-34) But I say to you,
whoever is angry with brother
R. (1b) Blessed are they who follow the law of the Lord! will be liable to judgment; ]
and whoever says to brother, ‘Raga,’
Blessed are they whose way is blameless, will be answerable to the Sanhedrin;
who walk in the law of the LORD. and whoever says, ‘You fool,’
Blessed are they who observe his decrees, will be liable to fiery Gehenna.
who seek him with all their heart.—R. Therefore, if you bring your gift to the altar,
and there recall that your brother
You have commanded that your precepts has anything against you,
be diligently kept. leave your gift there at the altar,
Oh, that I might be firm in the ways go first and be reconciled with your brother,
of keeping your statutes!—R. and then come and offer your gift.
Settle with your opponent quickly while on the way to court.
Be good to your servant, that I may live Otherwise your opponent will hand you over to the judge,
and keep your words. and the judge will hand you over to the guard,
Open my eyes, that I may consider and you will be thrown into prison.
the wonders of your law.—R. Amen, I say to you,
you will not be released until you have paid the last penny.
Instruct me, O LORD, in the way of your statutes, [ “You have heard that it was said,
that I may exactly observe them. You shall not commit adultery.
Give me discernment, that I may observe your law But I say to you,
and keep it with all my heart.—R. everyone who looks at a woman with lust
has already committed adultery with her in his heart. ]
SECOND READING (1 Cor 2:6-10) If your right eye causes you to sin,
tear it out and throw it away.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: It is better for you to lose one of your members
than to have your whole body thrown into Gehenna.
BROTHERS and sisters: And if your right hand causes you to sin,
We speak a wisdom to those who are mature, cut it off and throw it away.
not a wisdom of this age, It is better for you to lose one of your members
nor of the rulers of this age who are passing away. than to have your whole body go into Gehenna.
Rather, we speak Gods wisdom, mysterious, hidden, “It was also said,
which God predetermined before the ages for our glory, Whoever divorces his wife must give her a bill of divorce.
and which none of the rulers of this age knew; But I say to you,
for, if they had known it, whoever divorces his wife unless the marriage is unlawful
they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. causes her to commit adultery,
But as it is written: and whoever marries a divorced woman commits adultery.
What eye has not seen, and ear has not heard, [ “Again you have heard that it was said to your ancestors,
and what has not entered the human heart, Do not take a false oath,
what God has prepared for those who love him, but make good to the Lord all that you vow.
this God has revealed to us through the Spirit. But I say to you, do not swear at all; ]
not by heaven, for it is God’s throne;
For the Spirit scrutinizes everything, even the depths of God. nor by the earth, for it is his footstool;
nor by Jerusalem, for it is the city of the great King.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Do not swear by your head,
for you cannot make a single hair white or black.
ALLELUIA (cf. Matthew 11:25) [ Let your ‘Yes’ mean ‘Yes,’and your ‘No’ mean ‘No.’
Anything more is from the evil one.” ]
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 145 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS God has visited his people.—R.
SIXTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
GOSPEL (Mk 1:40-45)
FIRST READING (Lev 13:1-2, 44-46) + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
A reading from the Book of Leviticus: A LEPER came to Jesus and kneeling down begged him and said,
“If you wish, you can make me clean.”
THE Lord said to Moses and Aaron, Moved with pity, he stretched out his hand,
“If someone has on his skin a scab or pustule or blotch touched him, and said to him,
which appears to be the sore of leprosy, “I do will it. Be made clean.”
he shall be brought to Aaron, the priest, The leprosy left him immediately, and he was made clean.
or to one of the priests among his descendants. Then, warning the him sternly, he dismissed him at once.
If the man is leprous and unclean,
the priest shall declare him unclean He said to him, “See that you tell no one anything,
by reason of the sore on his head. but go, show yourself to the priest
and offer for your cleansing what Moses prescribed;
“The one who bears the sore of leprosy that will be proof for them.”
shall keep his garments rent and his head bare,
and shall muffle his beard; The man went away and began to publicize the whole matter.
he shall cry out, ‘Unclean, unclean!’ He spread the report abroad
As long as the sore is on him he shall declare himself unclean, so that it was impossible for Jesus to enter a town openly.
since he is in fact unclean. He remained outside in deserted places,
He shall dwell apart, making his abode outside the camp.” and people kept coming to him from everywhere.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 32:1-2, 5, 11)
R. (7) I turn to you, Lord, in time of trouble, and you fill me with
the joy of salvation.
Blessed is he whose fault is taken away,
whose sin is covered.
Blessed the man to whom the LORD imputes not guilt,
in whose spirit there is no guile.—R.
Then I acknowledged my sin to you,
my guilt I covered not.
I said, “I confess my faults to the LORD,”
and you took away the guilt of my sin.—R.
Be glad in the LORD and rejoice, you just;
exult, all you upright of heart.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 10:31-11:1)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters,
Whether you eat or drink, or whatever you do,
do everything for the glory of God.
Avoid giving offense, whether to the Jews or Greeks or
the church of God,
just as I try to please everyone in every way,
not seeking my own benefit but that of the many,
that they may be saved.
Be imitators of me, as I am of Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Luke 7:16)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
A great prophet has arisen in our midst,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 146 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
SIXTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
ALLELUIA (Luke 6:23ab)
FIRST READING (Jer 17:5-8) R. Alleluia, alleluia.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah: Rejoice and be glad;
your reward will be great in heaven.—R.
THUS says the LORD:
Cursed is the one who trusts in human beings, GOSPEL (Lk 6:17, 20-26)
who seeks his strength in flesh,
whose heart turns away from the LORD. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
He is like a barren bush in the desert
that enjoys no change of season, JESUS came down with the twelve
but stands in a lava waste, and stood on a stretch of level ground
a salt and empty earth. with a great crowd of his disciples
Blessed is the one who trusts in the LORD, and a large number of the people
whose hope is the LORD. from all Judea and Jerusalem
He is like a tree planted beside the waters and the coastal region of Tyre and Sidon.
that stretches out its roots to the stream: And raising his eyes toward his disciples he said:
it fears not the heat when it comes; “Blessed are you who are poor,
its leaves stay green; for the kingdom of God is yours.
in the year of drought it shows no distress, Blessed are you who are now hungry,
but still bears fruit. for you will be satisfied.
Blessed are you who are now weeping,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. for you will laugh.
Blessed are you when people hate you,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 1:1-2, 3, 4 and 6) and when they exclude and insult you,
and denounce your name as evil
R. (40:5a) Blessed are they who hope in the Lord. on account of the Son of Man.
Rejoice and leap for joy on that day!
Blessed the man who follows not Behold, your reward will be great in heaven.
the counsel of the wicked, For their ancestors treated the prophets in the same way.
nor walks in the way of sinners, But woe to you who are rich,
nor sits in the company of the insolent, for you have received your consolation.
but delights in the law of the LORD Woe to you who are filled now,
and meditates on his law day and night.—R. for you will be hungry.
Woe to you who laugh now,
He is like a tree for you will grieve and weep.
planted near running water, Woe to you when all speak well of you,
that yields its fruit in due season, for their ancestors treated the false
and whose leaves never fade. prophets in this way.”
Whatever he does, prospers.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Not so the wicked, not so;
they are like chaff which the wind drives away.
For the LORD watches over the way of the just,
but the way of the wicked vanishes.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 15:12, 16-20)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
If Christ is preached as raised from the dead,
how can some among you say there is no resurrection of the dead?
If the dead are not raised, neither has Christ been raised,
and if Christ has not been raised, your faith is vain;
you are still in your sins.
Then those who have fallen asleep in Christ have perished.
If for this life only we have hoped in Christ,
we are the most pitiable people of all.
But now Christ has been raised from the dead,
the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 147 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Paul or Apollos or Cephas,
SEVENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A or the world or life or death,
or the present or the future:
all belong to you, and you to Christ, and Christ to God.
FIRST READING (Lev 19:1-2, 17-18)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Book of Leviticus:
ALLELUIA (1 John 2:5)
THE LORD said to Moses,
“Speak to the whole Israelite community and tell them: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Be holy, for I, the LORD, your God, am holy.
Whoever keeps the word of Christ,
“You shall not bear hatred for your brother or sister in your heart. the love of God is truly perfected in him.—R.
Though you may have to reprove your fellow citizen,
do not incur sin because of him. GOSPEL (Mt 5:38-48)
Take no revenge and cherish no grudge against any of your people.
You shall love your neighbor as yourself. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
I am the LORD.”
JESUS said to his disciples:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. “You have heard that it was said,
An eye for an eye and a tooth for a tooth.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 103:1-2, 3-4, 8, 10, 12-13) But I say to you, offer no resistance to one who is evil.
When someone strikes you on your right cheek,
R. (8a) The Lord is kind and merciful. turn the other one as well.
If anyone wants to go to law with you over your tunic,
Bless the LORD, O my soul; hand over your cloak as well.
and all my being, bless his holy name. Should anyone press you into service for one mile,
Bless the LORD, O my soul, go for two miles.
and forget not all his benefits.—R. Give to the one who asks of you,
and do not turn your back on one who wants to borrow.
He pardons all your iniquities,
heals all your ills. “You have heard that it was said,
He redeems your life from destruction, You shall love your neighbor and hate your enemy.
crowns you with kindness and compassion.—R. But I say to you, love your enemies
and pray for those who persecute you,
Merciful and gracious is the LORD, that you may be children of your heavenly Father,
slow to anger and abounding in kindness. for he makes his sun rise on the bad and the good,
Not according to our sins does he deal with us, and causes rain to fall on the just and the unjust.
nor does he requite us according to our crimes.—R. For if you love those who love you, what recompense will you have?
Do not the tax collectors do the same?
As far as the east is from the west, And if you greet your brothers only,
so far has he put our transgressions from us. what is unusual about that?
As a father has compassion on his children, Do not the pagans do the same?
so the LORD has compassion on those who fear him.—R. So be perfect, just as your heavenly Father is perfect.”
SECOND READING (1 Cor 3:16-23) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Do you not know that you are the temple of God,
and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
If anyone destroys God’s temple, God will destroy that person;
for the temple of God, which you are, is holy.
Let no one deceive himself.
If any one among you considers himself wise in this age,
let him become a fool, so as to become wise.
For the wisdom of this world is foolishness in the eyes of God,
for it is written:
God catches the wise in their own ruses,
and again:
The Lord knows the thoughts of the wise,
that they are vain.
So let no one boast about human beings, for everything belongs to you,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 148 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (cf. Luke 4:18)
SEVENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Is 43:18-19, 21-22, 24b-25) The Lord sent me to bring glad tidings to the poor,
and to proclaim liberty to captives.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
GOSPEL (Mk 2:1-12)
THUS says the LORD:
Remember not the events of the past, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
the things of long ago consider not;
see, I am doing something new! WHEN Jesus returned to Capernaum after some days,
Now it springs forth, do you not perceive it? it became known that he was at home.
In the desert I make a way, Many gathered together so that there was no longer room for them,
in the wasteland, rivers. not even around the door,
The people I formed for myself, and he preached the word to them.
that they might announce my praise. They came bringing to him a paralytic carried by four men.
Yet you did not call upon me, O Jacob, Unable to get near Jesus because of the crowd,
for you grew weary of me, O Israel. they opened up the roof above him.
You burdened me with your sins, After they had broken through,
and wearied me with your crimes. they let down the mat on which the paralytic was lying.
It is I, I, who wipe out, When Jesus saw their faith, he said to the paralytic,
for my own sake, your offenses; “Child, your sins are forgiven.”
your sins I remember no more. Now some of the scribes were sitting there asking themselves,
“Why does this man speak that way? He is blaspheming.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Who but God alone can forgive sins?”
Jesus immediately knew in his mind
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 41:2-3, 4-5, 13-14) what they were thinking to themselves,
so he said, “Why are you thinking such things in your hearts?
R. (5b) Lord, heal my soul, for I have sinned against you. Which is easier, to say to the paralytic,
‘Your sins are forgiven,’
Blessed is the one who has regard for the lowly and the poor; or to say, ‘Rise, pick up your mat and walk?’
in the day of misfortune the LORD will deliver him. But that you may know
The LORD will keep and preserve him; that the Son of Man has authority to forgive sins on earth”
and make him blessed on earth, —he said to the paralytic,
and not give him over to the will of his enemies.—R. “I say to you, rise, pick up your mat, and go home.”
He rose, picked up his mat at once,
The LORD will help him on his sickbed, and went away in the sight of everyone.
he will take away all his ailment when he is ill. They were all astounded
Once I said, “O LORD, have pity on me; and glorified God, saying, “We have never seen anything like this.”
heal me, though I have sinned against you.”—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
But because of my integrity you sustain me
and let me stand before you forever.
Blessed be the LORD, the God of Israel,
from all eternity. Amen. Amen.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 1:18-22)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
As God is faithful,
our word to you is not “yes” and “no.”
For the Son of God, Jesus Christ,
who was proclaimed to you by us, Silvanus and Timothy and me,
was not “yes” and “no,” but “yes” has been in him.
For however many are the promises of God, their Yes is in him;
therefore, the Amen from us also goes through him to God for glory.
But the one who gives us security with you in Christ
and who anointed us is God;
he has also put his seal upon us
and given the Spirit in our hearts as a first installment.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 149 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (1 Cor 15:45-49)
SEVENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
FIRST READING (1 Sam 26:2, 7-9, 12-13, 22-23) BROTHERS and sisters:
It is written, The first man, Adam, became a living being,
A reading from the first Book of Samuel: the last Adam a life-giving spirit.
But the spiritual was not first;
IN those days, Saul went down to the desert of Ziph rather the natural and then the spiritual.
with three thousand picked men of Israel, The first man was from the earth, earthly;
to search for David in the desert of Ziph. the second man, from heaven.
So David and Abishai went among Saul’s soldiers by night As was the earthly one, so also are the earthly,
and found Saul lying asleep within the barricade, and as is the heavenly one, so also are the heavenly.
with his spear thrust into the ground at his head Just as we have borne the image of the earthly one,
and Abner and his men sleeping around him. we shall also bear the image of the heavenly one.
Abishai whispered to David: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
“God has delivered your enemy into your grasp this day.
Let me nail him to the ground with one thrust of the spear; ALLELUIA (John 13:34)
I will not need a second thrust!”
But David said to Abishai, “Do not harm him, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
for who can lay hands on the LORD’S anointed and remain
unpunished?” I give you a new commandment, says the Lord:
So David took the spear and the water jug from their place at love one another as I have loved you.—R.
Saul’s head,
and they got away without anyone’s seeing or knowing or GOSPEL (Lk 6:27-38)
awakening.
All remained asleep, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
because the LORD had put them into a deep slumber.
JESUS said to his disciples:
Going across to an opposite slope, “To you who hear I say,
David stood on a remote hilltop love your enemies, do good to those who hate you,
at a great distance from Abner, son of Ner, and the troops. bless those who curse you, pray for those who mistreat you.
He said: “Here is the king’s spear. To the person who strikes you on one cheek,
Let an attendant come over to get it. offer the other one as well,
The LORD will reward each man for his justice and faithfulness. and from the person who takes your cloak,
Today, though the LORD delivered you into my grasp, do not withhold even your tunic.
I would not harm the LORD’S anointed.” Give to everyone who asks of you,
and from the one who takes what is yours do not demand it back.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Do to others as you would have them do to you.
For if you love those who love you,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 103:1-2, 3-4, 8, 10, 12-13) what credit is that to you?
Even sinners love those who love them.
R. (8a) The Lord is kind and merciful. And if you do good to those who do good to you,
what credit is that to you?
Bless the LORD, O my soul; Even sinners do the same.
and all my being, bless his holy name. If you lend money to those from whom you expect repayment,
Bless the LORD, O my soul, what credit is that to you?
and forget not all his benefits.—R. Even sinners lend to sinners,
and get back the same amount.
He pardons all your iniquities, But rather, love your enemies and do good to them,
heals all your ills. and lend expecting nothing back;
He redeems your life from destruction, then your reward will be great
crowns you with kindness and compassion.—R. and you will be children of the Most High,
for he himself is kind to the ungrateful and the wicked.
Merciful and gracious is the LORD, Be merciful, just as your Father is merciful.
slow to anger and abounding in kindness.
Not according to our sins does he deal with us, “Stop judging and you will not be judged.
nor does he requite us according to our crimes.—R. Stop condemning and you will not be condemned.
Forgive and you will be forgiven.
As far as the east is from the west, Give, and gifts will be given to you;
so far has he put our transgressions from us. a good measure, packed together, shaken down, and overflowing,
As a father has compassion on his children, will be poured into your lap.
so the LORD has compassion on those who fear him.—R. For the measure with which you measure
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 150 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Mt 6:24-34)
EIGHTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
FIRST READING (Is 49:14-15) JESUS said to his disciples:
“No one can serve two masters.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: He will either hate one and love the other,
or be devoted to one and despise the other.
ZION said, “The Lord has forsaken me; You cannot serve God and mammon.
my Lord has forgotten me.”
Can a mother forget her infant, “Therefore I tell you, do not worry about your life,
be without tenderness for the child of her womb? what you will eat or drink,
Even should she forget, or about your body, what you will wear.
I will never forget you. Is not life more than food and the body more than clothing?
Look at the birds in the sky;
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. they do not sow or reap, they gather nothing into barns,
yet your heavenly Father feeds them.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 62:2-3, 6-7, 8-9) Are not you more important than they?
Can any of you by worrying add a single moment to your life-span?
R. (6a) Rest in God alone, my soul. Why are you anxious about clothes?
Learn from the way the wild flowers grow.
Only in God is my soul at rest; They do not work or spin.
from him comes my salvation. But I tell you that not even Solomon in all his splendor
He only is my rock and my salvation, was clothed like one of them.
my stronghold; I shall not be disturbed at all.—R. If God so clothes the grass of the field,
which grows today and is thrown into the oven tomorrow,
Only in God be at rest, my soul, will he not much more provide for you, O you of little faith?
for from him comes my hope. So do not worry and say, ‘What are we to eat?’
He only is my rock and my salvation, or ‘What are we to drink?’or ‘What are we to wear?’
my stronghold; I shall not be disturbed.—R. All these things the pagans seek.
Your heavenly Father knows that you need them all.
With God is my safety and my glory, But seek first the kingdom of God and his righteousness,
he is the rock of my strength; my refuge is in God. and all these things will be given you besides.
Trust in him at all times, O my people! Do not worry about tomorrow; tomorrow will take care of itself.
Pour out your hearts before him.—R. Sufficient for a day is its own evil.”
SECOND READING (1 Cor 4:1-5) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Thus should one regard us: as servants of Christ
and stewards of the mysteries of God.
Now it is of course required of stewards
that they be found trustworthy.
It does not concern me in the least
that I be judged by you or any human tribunal;
I do not even pass judgment on myself;
I am not conscious of anything against me,
but I do not thereby stand acquitted;
the one who judges me is the Lord.
Therefore do not make any judgment before the appointed time,
until the Lord comes,
for he will bring to light what is hidden in darkness
and will manifest the motives of our hearts,
and then everyone will receive praise from God.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Heb 4:12)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
The word of God is living and effective;
discerning reflections and thoughts of the heart.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 151 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Jas 1:18)
EIGHTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Hos 2:16b, 17b, 21-22) The Father willed to give us birth by the word of truth
that we may be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Hosea:
GOSPEL (Mk 2:18-22)
THUS says the Lord:
I will lead her into the desert + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
and speak to her heart.
She shall respond there as in the days of her youth, THE disciples of John and of the Pharisees were accustomed to fast.
when she came up from the land of Egypt. People came to him and objected,
I will espouse you to me forever: “Why do the disciples of John and the disciples of the Pharisees fast,
I will espouse you in right and in justice, but your disciples do not fast?”
in love and in mercy; Jesus answered them,
I will espouse you in fidelity, “Can the wedding guests fast while the bridegroom is with them?
and you shall know the Lord. As long as they have the bridegroom with them they cannot fast.
But the days will come when the bridegroom is taken away from them,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and then they will fast on that day.
No one sews a piece of unshrunken cloth on an old cloak.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 103:1-2, 3-4, 8, 10, 12-13) If he does, its fullness pulls away,
the new from the old, and the tear gets worse.
R. (8a) The Lord is kind and merciful. Likewise, no one pours new wine into old wineskins.
Otherwise, the wine will burst the skins,
Bless the Lord, O my soul; and both the wine and the skins are ruined.
and all my being, bless his holy name. Rather, new wine is poured into fresh wineskins.”
Bless the Lord, O my soul,
and forget not all his benefits.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
He pardons all your iniquities,
he heals all your ills.
He redeems your life from destruction,
he crowns you with kindness and compassion.—R.
Merciful and gracious is the Lord,
slow to anger and abounding in kindness.
Not according to our sins does he deal with us,
nor does he requite us according to our crimes.—R.
As far as the east is from the west,
so far has he put our transgressions from us.
As a father has compassion on his children,
so the Lord has compassion on those who fear him.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Cor 3:1b-6)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Do we need, as some do,
letters of recommendation to you or from you?
You are our letter, written on our hearts,
known and read by all,
shown to be a letter of Christ ministered by us,
written not in ink but by the Spirit of the living God,
not on tablets of stone but on tablets that are hearts of flesh.
Such confidence we have through Christ toward God.
Not that of ourselves we are qualified
to take credit for anything as coming from us;
rather, our qualification comes from God,
who has indeed qualified us as ministers of a new covenant,
not of letter but of spirit;
for the letter brings death, but the Spirit gives life.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 152 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Lk 6:39-45)
EIGHTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
FIRST READING (Sir 27:4-7) JESUS told his disciples a parable,
“Can a blind person guide a blind person?
A reading from the Book of Sirach: Will not both fall into a pit?
No disciple is superior to the teacher;
WHEN a sieve is shaken, the husks appear; but when fully trained,
so do one’s faults when one speaks. every disciple will be like his teacher.
As the test of what the potter molds is in the furnace, Why do you notice the splinter in your brother’s eye,
so in tribulation is the test of the just. but do not perceive the wooden beam in your own?
The fruit of a tree shows the care it has had; How can you say to your brother,
so too does one’s speech disclose the bent of one’s mind. ‘Brother, let me remove that splinter in your eye,’
Praise no one before he speaks, when you do not even notice the wooden beam in your own eye?
for it is then that people are tested. You hypocrite! Remove the wooden beam from your eye first;
then you will see clearly
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. to remove the splinter in your brother’s eye.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 92:2-3, 13-14, 15-16) “A good tree does not bear rotten fruit,
nor does a rotten tree bear good fruit.
R. (cf. 2a) Lord, it is good to give thanks to you. For every tree is known by its own fruit.
For people do not pick figs from thornbushes,
It is good to give thanks to the Lord, nor do they gather grapes from brambles.
to sing praise to your name, Most High, A good person out of the store of goodness in his heart produces good,
To proclaim your kindness at dawn but an evil person out of a store of evil produces evil;
and your faithfulness throughout the night.—R. for from the fullness of the heart the mouth speaks.”
The just one shall flourish like the palm tree, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
like a cedar of Lebanon shall he grow.
They that are planted in the house of the Lord
shall flourish in the courts of our God.—R.
They shall bear fruit even in old age;
vigorous and sturdy shall they be,
Declaring how just is the Lord,
my rock, in whom there is no wrong.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 15:54-58)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
When this which is corruptible clothes itself with incorruptibility
and this which is mortal clothes itself with immortality,
then the word that is written shall come about:
Death is swallowed up in victory.
Where, O death, is your victory?
Where, O death, is your sting?
The sting of death is sin,
and the power of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God who gives us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, my beloved brothers and sisters,
be firm, steadfast, always fully devoted to the work of the Lord,
knowing that in the Lord your labor is not in vain.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Phil 2:15d, 16a)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Shine like lights in the world
as you hold on to the word of life.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 153 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS whoever remains in me and I in him will bear much fruit.—R.
NINTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
GOSPEL (Mt 7:21-27)
FIRST READING (Deut 11:18, 26-28, 32) + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy: JESUS said to his disciples:
“Not everyone who says to me, ‘Lord, Lord,’
MOSES told the people, will enter the kingdom of heaven,
“Take these words of mine into your heart and soul. but only the one who does the will of my Father in heaven.
Bind them at your wrist as a sign, Many will say to me on that day,
and let them be a pendant on your forehead. ‘Lord, Lord, did we not prophesy in your name?
Did we not drive out demons in your name?
“I set before you here, this day, a blessing and a curse: Did we not do mighty deeds in your name?’
a blessing for obeying the commandments of the Lord, your God, Then I will declare to them solemnly,
which I enjoin on you today; ‘I never knew you. Depart from me, you evildoers.’
a curse if you do not obey the commandments of the Lord, your God,
but turn aside from the way I ordain for you today, “Everyone who listens to these words of mine and acts on them
will be like a wise man who built his house on rock.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The rain fell, the floods came,
and the winds blew and buffeted the house.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 31:2-3, 3-4, 17, 25) But it did not collapse; it had been set solidly on rock.
And everyone who listens to these words of mine
R. (3b) Lord, be my rock of safety. but does not act on them
will be like a fool who built his house on sand.
In you, O Lord, I take refuge; The rain fell, the floods came,
let me never be put to shame. and the winds blew and buffeted the house.
In your justice rescue me, And it collapsed and was completely ruined.”
incline your ear to me,
make haste to deliver me!—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Be my rock of refuge,
a stronghold to give me safety.
You are my rock and my fortress;
for your name’s sake you will lead and guide me.—R.
Let your face shine upon your servant;
save me in your kindness.
Take courage and be stouthearted,
all you who hope in the Lord.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 3:21-25, 28)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters,
Now the righteousness of God has been manifested apart from the law,
though testified to by the law and the prophets,
the righteousness of God through faith in Jesus Christ
for all who believe.
For there is no distinction;
all have sinned and are deprived of the glory of God.
They are justified freely by his grace
through the redemption in Christ Jesus,
whom God set forth as an expiation,
through faith, by his blood.
For we consider that a person is justified by faith
apart from works of the law.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (John 15:5)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
I am the vine, you are the branches, says the Lord;
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 154 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS For we who live are constantly being given up to death
NINTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B for the sake of Jesus,
so that the life of Jesus may be manifested in our mortal flesh.
FIRST READING (Deut 5:12-15) The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy: ALLELUIA (cf. John 17:17b, 17a)
THUS says the Lord: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
“Take care to keep holy the sabbath day
as the Lord, your God, commanded you. Your word, O Lord, is truth;
Six days you may labor and do all your work; consecrate us in the truth.—R.
but the seventh day is the sabbath of the Lord, your God.
No work may be done then, whether by you, or your son or daughter, GOSPEL (Mk 2:23-3:6 or 2:23-28)
or your male or female slave,
or your ox or ass or any of your beasts, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
or the alien who lives with you.
Your male and female slave should rest as you do. [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
For remember that you too were once a slave in Egypt,
and the Lord, your God, brought you from there [ AS Jesus was passing through a field of grain on the sabbath,
with his strong hand and outstretched arm. his disciples began to make a path while picking the heads of grain.
That is why the Lord, your God, has commanded you At this the Pharisees said to him,
to observe the sabbath day.” “Look, why are they doing what is unlawful on the sabbath?”
He said to them, “Have you never read what David did
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. when he was in need and he and his companions were hungry?
How he went into the house of God when Abiathar was high priest
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 81:3-4, 5-6, 6-8, 10-11) and ate the bread of offering
that only the priests could lawfully eat,
R. (2a) Sing with joy to God our help. and shared it with his companions?”
Then he said to them,
Take up a melody, and sound the timbrel, “The sabbath was made for man, not man for the sabbath.
the pleasant harp and the lyre. That is why the Son of Man is lord even of the sabbath.” ]
Blow the trumpet at the new moon,
at the full moon, on our solemn feast.—R. Again he entered the synagogue.
There was a man there who had a withered hand.
For it is a statute in Israel, They watched him closely
an ordinance of the God of Jacob, to see if he would cure him on the sabbath
Who made it a decree for Joseph so that they might accuse him.
when he came forth from the land of Egypt.—R. He said to the man with the withered hand,
“Come up here before us.”
An unfamiliar speech I hear: Then he said to them,
“I relieved his shoulder of the burden; “Is it lawful to do good on the sabbath rather than to do evil,
his hands were freed from the basket. to save life rather than to destroy it?”
In distress you called, and I rescued you.”—R. But they remained silent.
Looking around at them with anger
“There shall be no strange god among you and grieved at their hardness of heart,
nor shall you worship any alien god. he said to the man, “Stretch out your hand.”
I, the Lord, am your God He stretched it out and his hand was restored.
who led you forth from the land of Egypt.”—R. The Pharisees went out
and immediately took counsel with the Herodians against him
SECOND READING (2 Cor 4:6-11) to put him to death.
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
BROTHERS and sisters:
God who said, Let light shine out of darkness,
has shone in our hearts to bring to light
the knowledge of the glory of God on the face of Jesus Christ.
But we hold this treasure in earthen vessels,
that the surpassing power may be of God and not from us.
We are afflicted in every way, but not constrained;
perplexed, but not driven to despair;
persecuted, but not abandoned;
struck down, but not destroyed;
always carrying about in the body the dying of Jesus,
so that the life of Jesus may also be manifested in our body.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 155 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (John 3:16)
NINTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (1 Kgs 8:41-43) God so loved the world that he gave his only Son,
so that everyone who believes in him might have eternal life.—R.
A reading from the first Book of Kings:
GOSPEL (Lk 7:1-10)
IN those days, Solomon prayed in the temple, saying,
“To the foreigner, who is not of your people Israel, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
but comes from a distant land to honor you
—since they will learn of your great name WHEN Jesus had finished all his words to the people,
and your mighty hand and your outstretched arm—, he entered Capernaum.
when he comes and prays toward this temple, A centurion there had a slave who was ill and about to die,
listen from your heavenly dwelling. and he was valuable to him.
Do all that foreigner asks of you, When he heard about Jesus, he sent elders of the Jews to him,
that all the peoples of the earth may know your name, asking him to come and save the life of his slave.
may fear you as do your people Israel, They approached Jesus and strongly urged him to come, saying,
and may acknowledge that this temple which I have built “He deserves to have you do this for him,
is dedicated to your honor.” for he loves our nation and built the synagogue for us.”
And Jesus went with them,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. but when he was only a short distance from the house,
the centurion sent friends to tell him,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 117:1, 2) “Lord, do not trouble yourself,
for I am not worthy to have you enter under my roof.
R. (Mark 16:15) Go out to all the world and tell the good news. Therefore, I did not consider myself worthy to come to you;
or: but say the word and let my servant be healed.
R. Alleluia. For I too am a person subject to authority,
with soldiers subject to me.
Praise the Lord, all you nations; And I say to one, ‘Go,’and he goes;
glorify him, all you peoples!—R. and to another, ‘Come here,’and he comes;
and to my slave, ‘Do this,’and he does it.”
For steadfast is his kindness toward us, When Jesus heard this he was amazed at him
and the fidelity of the Lord endures forever.—R. and, turning, said to the crowd following him,
“I tell you, not even in Israel have I found such faith.”
SECOND READING (Gal 1:1-2, 6-10) When the messengers returned to the house,
they found the slave in good health.
A reading from the beginning of the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians:
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
PAUL, an apostle not from human beings nor through a human being
but through Jesus Christ and God the Father
who raised him from the dead,
and all the brothers who are with me,
to the churches of Galatia.
I am amazed that you are so quickly forsaking
the one who called you by the grace of Christ
for a different gospel - not that there is another.
But there are some who are disturbing you
and wish to pervert the gospel of Christ.
But even if we or an angel from heaven
should preach to you a gospel
other than the one that we preached to you,
let that one be accursed!
As we have said before, and now I say again,
if anyone preaches to you a gospel
other than what you have received, let that one be accursed!
Am I now currying favor with humans or with God?
Or am I seeking to please people?
If I were still trying to please people,
I would not be a slave of Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 156 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (cf. Luke 4:18)
TENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Hos 6:3-6) The Lord sent me to bring glad tidings to the poor,
and to proclaim liberty to captives.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Hosea:
GOSPEL (Mt 9:9-13)
IN their affliction, people will say:
“Let us know, let us strive to know the Lord; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
as certain as the dawn is his coming,
and his judgment shines forth like the light of day! AS Jesus passed on from there,
He will come to us like the rain, he saw a man named Matthew sitting at the customs post.
like spring rain that waters the earth.” He said to him, “Follow me.”
What can I do with you, Ephraim? And he got up and followed him.
What can I do with you, Judah? While he was at table in his house,
Your piety is like a morning cloud, many tax collectors and sinners came
like the dew that early passes away. and sat with Jesus and his disciples.
For this reason I smote them through the prophets, The Pharisees saw this and said to his disciples,
I slew them by the words of my mouth; “Why does your teacher eat with tax collectors and sinners?”
for it is love that I desire, not sacrifice, He heard this and said,
and knowledge of God rather than holocausts. “Those who are well do not need a physician, but the sick do.
Go and learn the meaning of the words,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. ‘I desire mercy, not sacrifice.’
I did not come to call the righteous but sinners.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM Psalm 50:1, 8, 12-13, 14-15
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
R. (23b) To the upright I will show the saving power of God.
God the Lord has spoken and summoned the earth,
from the rising of the sun to its setting.
“Not for your sacrifices do I rebuke you,
for your holocausts are before me always.”—R.
“If I were hungry, I would not tell you,
for mine are the world and its fullness.
Do I eat the flesh of strong bulls,
or is the blood of goats my drink?”—R.
“Offer to God praise as your sacrifice
and fulfill your vows to the Most High;
Then call upon me in time of distress;
I will rescue you, and you shall glorify me.”—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 4:18-25)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Abraham believed, hoping against hope,
that he would become “the father of many nations,”
according to what was said, “Thus shall your descendants be.”
He did not weaken in faith when he considered his own body
as already dead—for he was almost a hundred years old—
and the dead womb of Sarah.
He did not doubt God’s promise in unbelief;
rather, he was strengthened by faith and gave glory to God
and was fully convinced that what he had promised
he was also able to do.
That is why it was credited to him as righteousness.
But it was not for him alone that it was written
that it was credited to him;
it was also for us, to whom it will be credited,
who believe in the one who raised Jesus our Lord from the dead,
who was handed over for our transgressions
and was raised for our justification.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 157 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS so that the grace bestowed in abundance on more and more people
TENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B may cause the thanksgiving to overflow for the glory of God.
Therefore, we are not discouraged;
rather, although our outer self is wasting away,
our inner self is being renewed day by day.
FIRST READING (Gn 3:9-15)
For this momentary light affliction
is producing for us an eternal weight of glory
A reading from the Book of Genesis:
beyond all comparison,
as we look not to what is seen but to what is unseen;
AFTER the man, Adam, had eaten of the tree,
for what is seen is transitory, but what is unseen is eternal.
the Lord God called to the man and asked him, “Where are you?”
For we know that if our earthly dwelling, a tent,
He answered, “I heard you in the garden;
should be destroyed,
but I was afraid, because I was naked,
we have a building from God,
so I hid myself.”
a dwelling not made with hands, eternal in heaven.
Then he asked, “Who told you that you were naked?
You have eaten, then,
The word of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
from the tree of which I had forbidden you to eat!”
The man replied, “The woman whom you put here with me—
ALLELUIA (John 12:31b-32)
she gave me fruit from the tree, and so I ate it.”
The Lord God then asked the woman,
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
“Why did you do such a thing?”
The woman answered, “The serpent tricked me into it, so I ate it.”
Now the ruler of this world will be driven out, says the Lord;
and when I am lifted up from the earth, I will draw everyone
Then the Lord God said to the serpent:
to myself.—R.
“Because you have done this, you shall be banned
from all the animals
GOSPEL (Mk 3:20-35)
and from all the wild creatures;
on your belly shall you crawl,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
and dirt shall you eat
all the days of your life.
JESUS came home with his disciples.
I will put enmity between you and the woman,
Again the crowd gathered,
and between your offspring and hers;
making it impossible for them even to eat.
he will strike at your head,
When his relatives heard of this they set out to seize him,
while you strike at his heel.”
for they said, “He is out of his mind.”
The scribes who had come from Jerusalem said,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
“He is possessed by Beelzebul,”
and “By the prince of demons he drives out demons.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 130:1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8)
Summoning them, he began to speak to them in parables,
R. (7bc) With the Lord there is mercy, and fullness of redemption.
“How can Satan drive out Satan?
If a kingdom is divided against itself,
Out of the depths I cry to you, O Lord;
that kingdom cannot stand.
Lord, hear my voice!
And if a house is divided against itself,
Let your ears be attentive
that house will not be able to stand.
to my voice in supplication.—R.
And if Satan has risen up against himself
and is divided, he cannot stand;
If you, O Lord, mark iniquities,
that is the end of him.
Lord, who can stand?
But no one can enter a strong man’s house to plunder his property
But with you is forgiveness,
unless he first ties up the strong man.
that you may be revered.—R.
Then he can plunder the house.
Amen, I say to you,
I trust in the Lord;
all sins and all blasphemies that people utter will be
my soul trusts in his word.
forgiven them.
More than sentinels wait for the dawn,
But whoever blasphemes against the Holy Spirit
let Israel wait for the Lord.—R.
will never have forgiveness,
but is guilty of an everlasting sin.”
For with the Lord is kindness
For they had said, “He has an unclean spirit.”
and with him is plenteous redemption
and he will redeem Israel
His mother and his brothers arrived.
from all their iniquities.—R.
Standing outside they sent word to him and called him.
A crowd seated around him told him,
SECOND READING (2 Cor 4:13-5:1)
“Your mother and your brothers and your sisters
are outside asking for you.”
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
But he said to them in reply,
“Who are my mother and my brothers?”
BROTHERS and sisters:
And looking around at those seated in the circle he said,
Since we have the same spirit of faith,
“Here are my mother and my brothers.
according to what is written, I believed, therefore I spoke,
For whoever does the will of God
we too believe and therefore we speak,
is my brother and sister and mother.”
knowing that the one who raised the Lord Jesus
will raise us also with Jesus
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and place us with you in his presence.
Everything indeed is for you,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 158 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS For you heard of my former way of life in Judaism,
TENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C how I persecuted the church of God beyond measure
and tried to destroy it, and progressed in Judaism
beyond many of my contemporaries among my race,
FIRST READING (1 Kgs 17:17-24) since I was even more a zealot for my ancestral traditions.
But when God, who from my mother’s womb had set me apart
A reading from the first Book of Kings: and called me through his grace,
was pleased to reveal his Son to me,
ELIJAH went to Zarephath of Sidon to the house of a widow. so that I might proclaim him to the Gentiles,
The son of the mistress of the house fell sick, I did not immediately consult flesh and blood,
and his sickness grew more severe until he stopped breathing. nor did I go up to Jerusalem
So she said to Elijah, to those who were apostles before me;
“Why have you done this to me, O man of God? rather, I went into Arabia and then returned to Damascus.
Have you come to me to call attention to my guilt
and to kill my son?” Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem
Elijah said to her, “Give me your son.” to confer with Cephas and remained with him for fifteen days.
Taking him from her lap, he carried the son to the upper room But I did not see any other of the apostles,
where he was staying, and put him on his bed. only James the brother of the Lord.
Elijah called out to the Lord:
“O Lord, my God, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
will you afflict even the widow with whom I am staying
by killing her son?” ALLELUIA (Luke 7:16)
Then he stretched himself out upon the child three times
and called out to the Lord: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
“O Lord, my God,
let the life breath return to the body of this child.” A great prophet has risen in our midst
The Lord heard the prayer of Elijah; God has visited his people.—R.
the life breath returned to the child’s body and he revived.
Taking the child, Elijah brought him down into the house GOSPEL (Lk 7:11-17)
from the upper room and gave him to his mother.
Elijah said to her, “See! Your son is alive.” + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
The woman replied to Elijah,
“Now indeed I know that you are a man of God. JESUS journeyed to a city called Nain,
The word of the Lord comes truly from your mouth.” and his disciples and a large crowd accompanied him.
As he drew near to the gate of the city,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. a man who had died was being carried out,
the only son of his mother, and she was a widow.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 30:2, 4, 5-6, 11, 12, 13) A large crowd from the city was with her.
When the Lord saw her,
R. (2a) I will praise you, Lord, for you have rescued me. he was moved with pity for her and said to her,
“Do not weep.”
I will extol you, O Lord, for you drew me clear He stepped forward and touched the coffin;
and did not let my enemies rejoice over me. at this the bearers halted,
O Lord, you brought me up from the nether world; and he said, “Young man, I tell you, arise!”
you preserved me from among those going down into the pit.—R. The dead man sat up and began to speak,
and Jesus gave him to his mother.
Sing praise to the Lord, you his faithful ones, Fear seized them all, and they glorified God, exclaiming,
and give thanks to his holy name. “A great prophet has arisen in our midst,”
For his anger lasts but a moment; and “God has visited his people.”
a lifetime, his good will. This report about him spread through the whole of Judea
At nightfall, weeping enters in, and in all the surrounding region.
but with the dawn, rejoicing.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Hear, O Lord, and have pity on me;
O Lord, be my helper.
You changed my mourning into dancing;
O Lord, my God, forever will I give you thanks.—R.
SECOND READING (Gal 1:11-19)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians:
I WANT you to know, brothers and sisters,
that the gospel preached by me is not of human origin.
For I did not receive it from a human being, nor was I taught it,
but it came through a revelation of Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 159 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Mark 1:15)
ELEVENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Ex 19:2-6a) The kingdom of God is at hand.
Repent and believe in the Gospel.—R.
A reading from the Book of Exodus:
GOSPEL (Mt 9:36-10:8)
IN those days, the Israelites came to the desert of Sinai and pitched camp.
While Israel was encamped here in front of the mountain, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
Moses went up the mountain to God.
Then the Lord called to him and said, AT the sight of the crowds, Jesus’ heart was moved with pity for them
“Thus shall you say to the house of Jacob; because they were troubled and abandoned,
tell the Israelites: like sheep without a shepherd.
You have seen for yourselves how I treated the Egyptians Then he said to his disciples,
and how I bore you up on eagle wings “The harvest is abundant but the laborers are few;
and brought you here to myself. so ask the master of the harvest
Therefore, if you hearken to my voice and keep my covenant, to send out laborers for his harvest.”
you shall be my special possession,
dearer to me than all other people, Then he summoned his twelve disciples
though all the earth is mine. and gave them authority over unclean spirits
You shall be to me a kingdom of priests, a holy nation.” to drive them out and to cure every disease and every illness.
The names of the twelve apostles are these:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. first, Simon called Peter, and his brother Andrew;
James, the son of Zebedee, and his brother John;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 100:1-2, 3, 5) Philip and Bartholomew, Thomas and Matthew the tax collector;
James, the son of Alphaeus, and Thaddeus;
R. (3c) We are his people: the sheep of his flock. Simon from Cana, and Judas Iscariot who betrayed him.
Sing joyfully to the Lord, all you lands; Jesus sent out these twelve after instructing them thus,
serve the Lord with gladness; “Do not go into pagan territory or enter a Samaritan town.
come before him with joyful song.—R. Go rather to the lost sheep of the house of Israel.
As you go, make this proclamation: ‘The kingdom of heaven is at hand.’
Know that the Lord is God; Cure the sick, raise the dead, cleanse lepers, drive out demons.
he made us, his we are; Without cost you have received; without cost you are to give.”
his people, the flock he tends.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The Lord is good:
his kindness endures forever,
and his faithfulness to all generations.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 5:6-11)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Christ, while we were still helpless,
yet died at the appointed time for the ungodly.
Indeed, only with difficulty does one die for a just person,
though perhaps for a good person
one might even find courage to die.
But God proves his love for us
in that while we were still sinners Christ died for us.
How much more then, since we are now justified by his blood,
will we be saved through him from the wrath.
Indeed, if, while we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son,
how much more, once reconciled,
will we be saved by his life.
Not only that,
but we also boast of God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom we have now received reconciliation.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 160 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA
ELEVENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Ez 17:22-24) The seed is the word of God, Christ is the sower.
All who come to him will live for ever.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel:
GOSPEL (Mk 4:26-34)
THUS says the Lord GOD:
I, too, will take from the crest of the cedar, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
from its topmost branches tear off a tender shoot,
and plant it on a high and lofty mountain; JESUS said to the crowds:
on the mountain heights of Israel I will plant it. “This is how it is with the kingdom of God;
It shall put forth branches and bear fruit, it is as if a man were to scatter seed on the land
and become a majestic cedar. and would sleep and rise night and day
Birds of every kind shall dwell beneath it, and through it all the seed would sprout and grow,
every winged thing in the shade of its boughs. he knows not how.
And all the trees of the field shall know Of its own accord the land yields fruit,
that I, the Lord, first the blade, then the ear, then the full grain in the ear.
bring low the high tree, And when the grain is ripe, he wields the sickle at once,
lift high the lowly tree, for the harvest has come.”
wither up the green tree,
and make the withered tree bloom. He said,
As I, the Lord, have spoken, so will I do. “To what shall we compare the kingdom of God,
or what parable can we use for it?
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. It is like a mustard seed that, when it is sown in the ground,
is the smallest of all the seeds on the earth.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 92:2-3, 13-14, 15-16) But once it is sown, it springs up and becomes the largest of plants
and puts forth large branches,
R. (cf. 2a) Lord, it is good to give thanks to you. so that the birds of the sky can dwell in its shade.”
With many such parables
It is good to give thanks to the Lord, he spoke the word to them as they were able to understand it.
to sing praise to your name, Most High, Without parables he did not speak to them,
To proclaim your kindness at dawn but to his own disciples he explained everything in private.
and your faithfulness throughout the night.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The just one shall flourish like the palm tree,
like a cedar of Lebanon shall he grow.
They that are planted in the house of the Lord
shall flourish in the courts of our God.—R.
They shall bear fruit even in old age;
vigorous and sturdy shall they be,
Declaring how just is the Lord,
my rock, in whom there is no wrong.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Cor 5:6-10)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
We are always courageous,
although we know that while we are at home in the body
we are away from the Lord,
for we walk by faith, not by sight.
Yet we are courageous,
and we would rather leave the body and go home to the Lord.
Therefore, we aspire to please him,
whether we are at home or away.
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ,
so that each may receive recompense,
according to what he did in the body, whether good or evil.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 161 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS then Christ died for nothing.
ELEVENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (1 John 4:10b)
FIRST READING (2 Sam 12:7-10, 13)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
A reading from the second Book of Samuel:
God loved us and sent his Son
NATHAN said to David:
as expiation for our sins.—R.
“Thus says the Lord God of Israel:
‘I anointed you king of Israel.
GOSPEL (Lk 7:36-8:3 or 7:36-50)
I rescued you from the hand of Saul.
I gave you your lord’s house and your lord’s wives for your own.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
I gave you the house of Israel and of Judah.
And if this were not enough, I could count up for you still more.
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
Why have you spurned the Lord and done evil in his sight?
You have cut down Uriah the Hittite with the sword;
[ A PHARISEE invited Jesus to dine with him,
you took his wife as your own,
and he entered the Pharisee’s house and reclined at table.
and him you killed with the sword of the Ammonites.
Now there was a sinful woman in the city
Now, therefore, the sword shall never depart from your house,
who learned that he was at table in the house of the Pharisee.
because you have despised me
Bringing an alabaster flask of ointment,
and have taken the wife of Uriah to be your wife.’
she stood behind him at his feet weeping
Then David said to Nathan,
and began to bathe his feet with her tears.
“I have sinned against the Lord.”
Then she wiped them with her hair,
Nathan answered David:
kissed them, and anointed them with the ointment.
“The Lord on his part has forgiven your sin:
When the Pharisee who had invited him saw this he said to himself,
you shall not die.”
“If this man were a prophet,
he would know who and what sort of woman this is who is
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
touching him,
that she is a sinner.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (32:1-2, 5, 7, 11)
Jesus said to him in reply,
“Simon, I have something to say to you.”
R. (cf. 5c) Lord, forgive the wrong I have done.
“Tell me, teacher,” he said.
“Two people were in debt to a certain creditor;
Blessed is the one whose fault is taken away,
one owed five hundred days’ wages and the other owed fifty.
whose sin is covered.
Since they were unable to repay the debt, he forgave it for both.
Blessed the man to whom the Lord imputes not guilt,
Which of them will love him more?”
in whose spirit there is no guile.—R.
Simon said in reply,
“The one, I suppose, whose larger debt was forgiven.”
I acknowledged my sin to you,
He said to him, “You have judged rightly.”
my guilt I covered not.
I said, “I confess my faults to the Lord,”
Then he turned to the woman and said to Simon,
and you took away the guilt of my sin.—R.
“Do you see this woman?
When I entered your house, you did not give me water for my feet,
You are my shelter; from distress you will preserve me;
but she has bathed them with her tears
with glad cries of freedom you will ring me round.—R.
and wiped them with her hair.
You did not give me a kiss,
Be glad in the Lord and rejoice, you just;
but she has not ceased kissing my feet since the time I entered.
exult, all you upright of heart.—R.
You did not anoint my head with oil,
but she anointed my feet with ointment.
SECOND READING (Gal 2:16, 19-21)
So I tell you, her many sins have been forgiven
because she has shown great love.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians:
But the one to whom little is forgiven, loves little.”
He said to her, “Your sins are forgiven.”
BROTHERS and sisters:
The others at table said to themselves,
We who know that a person is not justified by works of the law
“Who is this who even forgives sins?”
but through faith in Jesus Christ,
But he said to the woman,
even we have believed in Christ Jesus
“Your faith has saved you; go in peace.” ]
that we may be justified by faith in Christ
and not by works of the law,
Afterward he journeyed from one town and village to another,
because by works of the law no one will be justified.
preaching and proclaiming the good news of the kingdom of God.
For through the law I died to the law,
Accompanying him were the Twelve
that I might live for God.
and some women who had been cured of evil spirits and infirmities,
I have been crucified with Christ;
Mary, called Magdalene, from whom seven demons had gone out,
yet I live, no longer I, but Christ lives in me;
Joanna, the wife of Herod’s steward Chuza,
insofar as I now live in the flesh,
Susanna, and many others who provided for them
I live by faith in the Son of God
out of their resources.
who has loved me and given himself up for me.
I do not nullify the grace of God;
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
for if justification comes through the law,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 162 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS But death reigned from Adam to Moses,
TWELFTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A even over those who did not sin
after the pattern of the trespass of Adam,
who is the type of the one who was to come.
FIRST READING (Jer 20:10-13)
But the gift is not like the transgression.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah: For if by the transgression of the one the many died,
how much more did the grace of God
JEREMIAH said: and the gracious gift of the one man Jesus Christ
“I hear the whisperings of many:
‘Terror on every side! The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Denounce! let us denounce him!’
All those who were my friends ALLELUIA (John 15:26b, 27a)
are on the watch for any misstep of mine.
‘Perhaps he will be trapped; then we can prevail, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and take our vengeance on him.’
But the LORD is with me, like a mighty champion: The Spirit of truth will testify to me, says the Lord;
my persecutors will stumble, they will not triumph. and you also will testify.—R.
In their failure they will be put to utter shame,
to lasting, unforgettable confusion. GOSPEL (Mt 10:26-33)
O LORD of hosts, you who test the just,
who probe mind and heart, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
let me witness the vengeance you take on them,
for to you I have entrusted my cause. JESUS said to the Twelve:
Sing to the LORD, “Fear no one.
praise the LORD, Nothing is concealed that will not be revealed,
for he has rescued the life of the poor nor secret that will not be known.
from the power of the wicked!” What I say to you in the darkness, speak in the light;
what you hear whispered, proclaim on the housetops.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. And do not be afraid of those who kill the body but cannot kill the soul;
rather, be afraid of the one who can destroy
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 69:8-10, 14, 17, 33-35) both soul and body in Gehenna.
Are not two sparrows sold for a small coin?
R. (14c) Lord, in your great love, answer me. Yet not one of them falls to the ground without your Father’s knowledge.
Even all the hairs of your head are counted.
For your sake I bear insult, So do not be afraid; you are worth more than many sparrows.
and shame covers my face. Everyone who acknowledges me before others
I have become an outcast to my brothers, I will acknowledge before my heavenly Father.
a stranger to my children, But whoever denies me before others,
Because zeal for your house consumes me, I will deny before my heavenly Father.”
and the insults of those who blaspheme you fall upon me.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
I pray to you, O Lord,
for the time of your favor, O God!
In your great kindness answer me
with your constant help.
Answer me, O Lord, for bounteous is your kindness;
in your great mercy turn toward me.—R.
“See, you lowly ones, and be glad;
you who seek God, may your hearts revive!
For the Lord hears the poor,
and his own who are in bonds he spurns not.
Let the heavens and the earth praise him,
the seas and whatever moves in them!’”—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 5:12-15)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Through one man sin entered the world,
and through sin, death,
and thus death came to all men, inasmuch as all sinned—
for up to the time of the law, sin was in the world,
though sin is not accounted when there is no law.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 163 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Luke 7:16)
TWELFTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Job 38:1, 8-11) A great prophet has risen in our midst
God has visited his people.—R.
A reading from the Book of Job:
GOSPEL (Mk 4:35-41)
THE Lord addressed Job out of the storm and said:
Who shut within doors the sea, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
when it burst forth from the womb;
when I made the clouds its garment ON that day, as evening drew on, Jesus said to his disciples:
and thick darkness its swaddling bands? “Let us cross to the other side.”
When I set limits for it Leaving the crowd, they took Jesus with them in the boat just as he was.
and fastened the bar of its door, And other boats were with him.
and said: Thus far shall you come but no farther, A violent squall came up and waves were breaking over the boat,
and here shall your proud waves be stilled! so that it was already filling up.
Jesus was in the stern, asleep on a cushion.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. They woke him and said to him,
“Teacher, do you not care that we are perishing?”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 107:23-24, 25-26, 28-29, 30-31) He woke up,
rebuked the wind, and said to the sea, “Quiet! Be still!”
R. (1b) Give thanks to the Lord, his love is everlasting. The wind ceased and there was great calm.
or: Then he asked them, “Why are you terrified?
R. Alleluia. Do you not yet have faith?”
They were filled with great awe and said to one another,
They who sailed the sea in ships, “Who then is this whom even wind and sea obey?”
trading on the deep waters,
These saw the works of the Lord The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and his wonders in the abyss.—R.
His command raised up a storm wind
which tossed its waves on high.
They mounted up to heaven; they sank to the depths;
their hearts melted away in their plight.—R.
They cried to the Lord in their distress;
from their straits he rescued them,
He hushed the storm to a gentle breeze,
and the billows of the sea were stilled.—R.
They rejoiced that they were calmed,
and he brought them to their desired haven.
Let them give thanks to the Lord for his kindness
and his wondrous deeds to the children of men.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Cor 5:14-17)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
The love of Christ impels us,
once we have come to the conviction that one died for all;
therefore, all have died.
He indeed died for all,
so that those who live might no longer live for themselves
but for him who for their sake died and was raised.
Consequently, from now on we regard no one according to the flesh;
even if we once knew Christ according to the flesh,
yet now we know him so no longer.
So whoever is in Christ is a new creation:
the old things have passed away;
behold, new things have come.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 164 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (John 10:27)
TWELFTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Zec 12:10-11; 13:1) My sheep hear my voice, says the Lord;
I know them, and they follow me.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Zechariah:
GOSPEL (Lk 9:18-24)
THUS says the Lord:
I will pour out on the house of David + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
and on the inhabitants of Jerusalem
a spirit of grace and petition; ONCE when Jesus was praying in solitude,
and they shall look on him whom they have pierced, and the disciples were with him,
and they shall mourn for him as one mourns for an only son, he asked them, "Who do the crowds say that I am?"
and they shall grieve over him as one grieves over a firstborn. They said in reply, "John the Baptist;
others, Elijah;
On that day the mourning in Jerusalem shall be as great still others, ';One of the ancient prophets has arisen.'"
as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the plain of Megiddo. Then he said to them, "But who do you say that I am?"
Peter said in reply, "The Christ of God."
On that day there shall be open to the house of David He rebuked them
and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and directed them not to tell this to anyone.
a fountain to purify from sin and uncleanness.
He said, "The Son of Man must suffer greatly
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes,
and be killed and on the third day be raised."
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 63:2, 3-4, 5-6, 8-9)
Then he said to all,
R. (2b) My soul is thirsting for you, O Lord my God. "If anyone wishes to come after me, he must deny himself
and take up his cross daily and follow me.
O God, you are my God whom I seek; For whoever wishes to save his life will lose it,
for you my flesh pines and my soul thirsts but whoever loses his life for my sake will save it."
like the earth, parched, lifeless and without water.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Thus have I gazed toward you in the sanctuary
to see your power and your glory,
For your kindness is a greater good than life;
my lips shall glorify you.—R.
Thus will I bless you while I live;
lifting up my hands, I will call upon your name.
As with the riches of a banquet shall my soul be satisfied,
and with exultant lips my mouth shall praise you.—R.
You are my help,
and in the shadow of your wings I shout for joy.
My soul clings fast to you;
your right hand upholds me.—R.
SECOND READING (Gal 3:26-29)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Through faith you are all children of God in Christ Jesus.
For all of you who were baptized into Christ
have clothed yourselves with Christ.
There is neither Jew nor Greek,
there is neither slave nor free person,
there is not male and female;
for you are all one in Christ Jesus.
And if you belong to Christ,
then you are Abraham's descendant,
heirs according to the promise.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 165 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and living for God in Christ Jesus.
THIRTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (2 Kgs 4:8-11, 14-16a) ALLELUIA (1 Peter 2:9)
A reading from the second Book of Kings: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
ONE day Elisha came to Shunem, You are a chosen race, a royal priesthood, a holy nation;
where there was a woman of influence, who urged him announce the praises of him who called you out of darkness
to dine with her. into his wonderful light.—R.
Afterward, whenever he passed by, he used to stop there to dine.
So she said to her husband, "I know that Elisha is a holy man of God. GOSPEL (Mt 10:37-42)
Since he visits us often, let us arrange a little room on the roof
and furnish it for him with a bed, table, chair, and lamp, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
so that when he comes to us he can stay there."
Sometime later Elisha arrived and stayed in the room overnight. JESUS said to his apostles:
"Whoever loves father or mother more than me is not worthy of me,
Later Elisha asked, "Can something be done for her?" and whoever loves son or daughter more than me is not worthy
His servant Gehazi answered, "Yes! of me;
She has no son, and her husband is getting on in years." and whoever does not take up his cross
Elisha said, "Call her." and follow after me is not worthy of me.
When the woman had been called and stood at the door, Whoever finds his life will lose it,
Elisha promised, "This time next year and whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
you will be fondling a baby son." Whoever receives you receives me,
and whoever receives me receives the one who sent me.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Whoever receives a prophet because he is a prophet
will receive a prophet's reward,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 89:2-3, 16-17, 18-19) and whoever receives a righteous man
because he is a righteous man
R. (2a) For ever I will sing the goodness of the Lord. will receive a righteous man's reward.
And whoever gives only a cup of cold water
The promises of the Lord I will sing forever, to one of these little ones to drink
through all generations my mouth shall proclaim your faithfulness. because the little one is a disciple-
For you have said, "My kindness is established forever;" amen, I say to you, he will surely not lose his reward."
in heaven you have confirmed your faithfulness.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Blessed the people who know the joyful shout;
in the light of your countenance, O Lord, they walk.
At your name they rejoice all the day,
and through your justice they are exalted.—R.
You are the splendor of their strength,
and by your favor our horn is exalted.
For to the Lord belongs our shield,
and the Holy One of Israel, our king.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 6:3-4, 8-11)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Are you unaware that we who were baptized into Christ Jesus
were baptized into his death?
We were indeed buried with him through baptism into death,
so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead
by the glory of the Father,
we too might live in newness of life.
If, then, we have died with Christ,
we believe that we shall also live with him.
We know that Christ, raised from the dead, dies no more;
death no longer has power over him.
As to his death, he died to sin once and for all;
as to his life, he lives for God.
Consequently, you too must think of yourselves as dead to sin
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 166 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Our Savior Jesus Christ destroyed death
THIRTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B and brought life to light through the Gospel.—R.
GOSPEL (Mk 5:21-43 or 5:21-24, 35b-43)
FIRST READING (Wis 1:13-15; 2:23-24)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
A reading from the Book of Wisdom:
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
GOD did not make death,
[ WHEN Jesus had crossed again in the boat
nor does he rejoice in the destruction of the living.
to the other side,
For he fashioned all things that they might have being;
a large crowd gathered around him, and he stayed close to the sea.
and the creatures of the world are wholesome,
One of the synagogue officials, named Jairus, came forward.
and there is not a destructive drug among them
Seeing him he fell at his feet and pleaded earnestly with him, saying,
nor any domain of the netherworld on earth,
"My daughter is at the point of death.
for justice is undying.
Please, come lay your hands on her
For God formed man to be imperishable;
that she may get well and live."
the image of his own nature he made him.
He went off with him,
But by the envy of the devil, death entered the world,
and a large crowd followed him and pressed upon him. ]
and they who belong to his company experience it.
There was a woman afflicted with hemorrhages for twelve years.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
She had suffered greatly at the hands of many doctors
and had spent all that she had.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 30:2, 4, 5-6, 11, 12, 13)
Yet she was not helped but only grew worse.
She had heard about Jesus and came up behind him in the crowd
R. (2a) I will praise you, Lord, for you have rescued me.
and touched his cloak.
She said, "If I but touch his clothes, I shall be cured."
I will extol you, O Lord, for you drew me clear
Immediately her flow of blood dried up.
and did not let my enemies rejoice over me.
She felt in her body that she was healed of her affliction.
O Lord, you brought me up from the netherworld;
Jesus, aware at once that power had gone out from him,
you preserved me from among those going down into the pit.—R.
turned around in the crowd and asked, "Who has touched my clothes?"
But his disciples said to Jesus,
Sing praise to the Lord, you his faithful ones,
"You see how the crowd is pressing upon you,
and give thanks to his holy name.
and yet you ask, ';Who touched me?'"
For his anger lasts but a moment;
And he looked around to see who had done it.
a lifetime, his good will.
The woman, realizing what had happened to her,
At nightfall, weeping enters in,
approached in fear and trembling.
but with the dawn, rejoicing.—R.
She fell down before Jesus and told him the whole truth.
He said to her, "Daughter, your faith has saved you.
Hear, O Lord, and have pity on me;
Go in peace and be cured of your affliction."
O Lord, be my helper.
You changed my mourning into dancing;
[ While he was still speaking,
O Lord, my God, forever will I give you thanks.—R.
people from the synagogue official's house arrived and said,
"Your daughter has died; why trouble the teacher any longer?"
SECOND READING (2 Cor 8:7, 9, 13-15)
Disregarding the message that was reported,
Jesus said to the synagogue official,
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
"Do not be afraid; just have faith."
He did not allow anyone to accompany him inside
BROTHERS and sisters:
except Peter, James, and John, the brother of James.
As you excel in every respect, in faith, discourse,
When they arrived at the house of the synagogue official,
knowledge, all earnestness, and in the love we have for you,
he caught sight of a commotion,
may you excel in this gracious act also.
people weeping and wailing loudly.
So he went in and said to them,
For you know the gracious act of our Lord Jesus Christ,
"Why this commotion and weeping?
that though he was rich, for your sake he became poor,
The child is not dead but asleep."
so that by his poverty you might become rich.
And they ridiculed him.
Not that others should have relief while you are burdened,
Then he put them all out.
but that as a matter of equality
He took along the child's father and mother
your abundance at the present time should supply their needs,
and those who were with him
so that their abundance may also supply your needs,
and entered the room where the child was.
that there may be equality.
He took the child by the hand and said to her, "Talitha koum,"
As it is written:
which means, "Little girl, I say to you, arise!"
Whoever had much did not have more,
The girl, a child of twelve, arose immediately and walked around.
and whoever had little did not have less.
At that they were utterly astounded.
He gave strict orders that no one should know this
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and said that she should be given something to eat. ]
ALLELUIA (cf. 2 Tm 1:10)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 167 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS beware that you are not consumed by one another.
THIRTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
I say, then: live by the Spirit
and you will certainly not gratify the desire of the flesh.
FIRST READING (1 Kgs 19:16b, 19-21) For the flesh has desires against the Spirit,
and the Spirit against the flesh;
A reading from the first Book of Kings: these are opposed to each other,
so that you may not do what you want.
THE Lord said to Elijah: But if you are guided by the Spirit, you are not under the law.
"You shall anoint Elisha, son of Shaphat of Abelmeholah,
as prophet to succeed you." The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Elijah set out and came upon Elisha, son of Shaphat, ALLELUIA (1 Samuel 3:9; John 6:68c)
as he was plowing with twelve yoke of oxen;
he was following the twelfth. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Elijah went over to him and threw his cloak over him.
Elisha left the oxen, ran after Elijah, and said, Speak, Lord, your servant is listening;
"Please, let me kiss my father and mother goodbye, you have the words of everlasting life.—R.
and I will follow you."
Elijah answered, "Go back! GOSPEL (Lk 9:51-62)
Have I done anything to you?"
Elisha left him, and taking the yoke of oxen, slaughtered them; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
he used the plowing equipment for fuel to boil their flesh,
and gave it to his people to eat. WHEN the days for Jesus' being taken up were fulfilled,
Then Elisha left and followed Elijah as his attendant. he resolutely determined to journey to Jerusalem,
and he sent messengers ahead of him.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. On the way they entered a Samaritan village
to prepare for his reception there,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 16:1-2, 5, 7-8, 9-10, 11) but they would not welcome him
because the destination of his journey was Jerusalem.
R. (cf. 5a) You are my inheritance, O Lord. When the disciples James and John saw this they asked,
"Lord, do you want us to call down fire from heaven
Keep me, O God, for in you I take refuge; to consume them?"
I say to the Lord, "My Lord are you. Jesus turned and rebuked them, and they journeyed to another village.
O Lord, my allotted portion and my cup,
you it is who hold fast my lot."—R. As they were proceeding on their journey someone said to him,
"I will follow you wherever you go."
I bless the Lord who counsels me; Jesus answered him,
even in the night my heart exhorts me. "Foxes have dens and birds of the sky have nests,
I set the Lord ever before me; but the Son of Man has nowhere to rest his head."
with him at my right hand I shall not be disturbed.—R.
And to another he said, "Follow me."
Therefore my heart is glad and my soul rejoices, But he replied, "Lord, let me go first and bury my father."
my body, too, abides in confidence But he answered him, "Let the dead bury their dead.
because you will not abandon my soul to the netherworld, But you, go and proclaim the kingdom of God."
nor will you suffer your faithful one to undergo corruption.—R. And another said, "I will follow you, Lord,
but first let me say farewell to my family at home."
You will show me the path to life, To him Jesus said, "No one who sets a hand to the plow
fullness of joys in your presence, and looks to what was left behind is fit for the kingdom of God."
the delights at your right hand forever.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
SECOND READING (Gal 5:1, 13-18)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
For freedom Christ set us free;
so stand firm and do not submit again to the yoke of slavery.
For you were called for freedom, brothers and sisters.
But do not use this freedom
as an opportunity for the flesh;
rather, serve one another through love.
For the whole law is fulfilled in one statement,
namely, You shall love your neighbor as yourself.
But if you go on biting and devouring one another,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 168 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS For if you live according to the flesh, you will die,
FOURTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A but if by the Spirit you put to death the deeds of the body,
you will live.
FIRST READING (Zec 9:9-10) The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Zechariah: ALLELUIA (cf. Matthew 11:25)
THUS says the LORD: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Rejoice heartily, O daughter Zion,
shout for joy, O daughter Jerusalem! Blessed are you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth;
See, your king shall come to you; you have revealed to little ones the mysteries of the kingdom.—R.
a just savior is he,
meek, and riding on an ass, GOSPEL (Mt 11:25-30)
on a colt, the foal of an ass.
He shall banish the chariot from Ephraim, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
and the horse from Jerusalem;
the warrior's bow shall be banished, AT that time Jesus exclaimed:
and he shall proclaim peace to the nations. "I give praise to you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
His dominion shall be from sea to sea, for although you have hidden these things
and from the River to the ends of the earth. from the wise and the learned
you have revealed them to little ones.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Yes, Father, such has been your gracious will.
All things have been handed over to me by my Father.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 145:1-2, 8-9, 10-11, 13-14) No one knows the Son except the Father,
and no one knows the Father except the Son
R. (cf. 1) I will praise your name for ever, my king and my God. and anyone to whom the Son wishes to reveal him."
or:
R. Alleluia. "Come to me, all you who labor and are burdened,
and I will give you rest.
I will extol you, O my God and King, Take my yoke upon you and learn from me,
and I will bless your name forever and ever. for I am meek and humble of heart;
Every day will I bless you, and you will find rest for yourselves.
and I will praise your name forever and ever.—R. For my yoke is easy, and my burden light."
The Lord is gracious and merciful, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
slow to anger and of great kindness.
The Lord is good to all
and compassionate toward all his works.—R.
Let all your works give you thanks, O Lord,
and let your faithful ones bless you.
Let them discourse of the glory of your kingdom
and speak of your might.—R.
The Lord is faithful in all his words
and holy in all his works.
The Lord lifts up all who are falling
and raises up all who are bowed down.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 8:9, 11-13)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
You are not in the flesh;
on the contrary, you are in the spirit,
if only the Spirit of God dwells in you.
Whoever does not have the Spirit of Christ does not belong to him.
If the Spirit of the one who raised Jesus from the dead dwells in you,
the one who raised Christ from the dead
will give life to your mortal bodies also,
through his Spirit that dwells in you.
Consequently, brothers and sisters,
we are not debtors to the flesh,
to live according to the flesh.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 169 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS The Spirit of the Lord is upon me
FOURTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B for he sent me to bring glad tidings to the poor.—R.
GOSPEL (Mk 6:1-6)
FIRST READING (Ez 2:2-5)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel:
JESUS departed from there and came to his native place, accompanied by
AS the LORD spoke to me, the spirit entered into me his disciples.
and set me on my feet, When the sabbath came he began to teach in the synagogue,
and I heard the one who was speaking say to me: and many who heard him were astonished.
Son of man, I am sending you to the Israelites, They said, "Where did this man get all this?
rebels who have rebelled against me; What kind of wisdom has been given him?
they and their ancestors have revolted against me to this very day. What mighty deeds are wrought by his hands!
Hard of face and obstinate of heart Is he not the carpenter, the son of Mary,
are they to whom I am sending you. and the brother of James and Joses and Judas and Simon?
But you shall say to them: Thus says the LORD GOD! And are not his sisters here with us?"
And whether they heed or resist-for they are a rebellious house- And they took offense at him.
they shall know that a prophet has been among them. Jesus said to them,
"A prophet is not without honor except in his native place
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and among his own kin and in his own house."
So he was not able to perform any mighty deed there,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 123:1-2, 2, 3-4) apart from curing a few sick people by laying his hands on them.
He was amazed at their lack of faith.
R. (2cd) Our eyes are fixed on the Lord, pleading for his mercy.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
To you I lift up my eyes
who are enthroned in heaven—
As the eyes of servants
are on the hands of their masters.—R.
As the eyes of a maid
are on the hands of her mistress,
So are our eyes on the Lord, our God,
till he have pity on us.—R.
Have pity on us, O Lord, have pity on us,
for we are more than sated with contempt;
our souls are more than sated
with the mockery of the arrogant,
with the contempt of the proud.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Cor 12:7-10)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
That I, Paul, might not become too elated,
because of the abundance of the revelations,
a thorn in the flesh was given to me, an angel of Satan,
to beat me, to keep me from being too elated.
Three times I begged the Lord about this, that it might leave me,
but he said to me, "My grace is sufficient for you,
for power is made perfect in weakness."
I will rather boast most gladly of my weaknesses,
in order that the power of Christ may dwell with me.
Therefore, I am content with weaknesses, insults,
hardships, persecutions, and constraints,
for the sake of Christ;
for when I am weak, then I am strong.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (cf. Luke 4:18)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 170 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Peace and mercy be to all who follow this rule
FOURTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C and to the Israel of God.
From now on, let no one make troubles for me;
FIRST READING (Is 66:10-14c) for I bear the marks of Jesus on my body.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with your spirit,
brothers and sisters. Amen.
THUS says the LORD:
Rejoice with Jerusalem and be glad because of her, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
all you who love her;
exult, exult with her, ALLELUIA (Col 3:15a, 16a)
all you who were mourning over her!
Oh, that you may suck fully R. Alleluia, alleluia.
of the milk of her comfort,
that you may nurse with delight Let the peace of Christ control your hearts;
at her abundant breasts! let the word of Christ dwell in you richly.—R.
For thus says the LORD:
Lo, I will spread prosperity over Jerusalem like a river, GOSPEL (Lk 10:1-12, 17-20 or 10:1-9)
and the wealth of the nations like an overflowing torrent.
As nurslings, you shall be carried in her arms, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
and fondled in her lap;
as a mother comforts her child, [ Short form in brackets. ]
so will I comfort you;
in Jerusalem you shall find your comfort. [ AT that time the Lord appointed seventy-two others
whom he sent ahead of him in pairs
When you see this, your heart shall rejoice to every town and place he intended to visit.
and your bodies flourish like the grass; He said to them,
the LORD's power shall be known to his servants. "The harvest is abundant but the laborers are few;
so ask the master of the harvest
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. to send out laborers for his harvest.
Go on your way;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 66:1-3, 4-5, 6-7, 16, 20) behold, I am sending you like lambs among wolves.
Carry no money bag, no sack, no sandals;
R. (1) Let all the earth cry out to God with joy. and greet no one along the way.
Into whatever house you enter, first say,
Shout joyfully to God, all the earth, 'Peace to this household.'
sing praise to the glory of his name; If a peaceful person lives there,
proclaim his glorious praise. your peace will rest on him;
Say to God, How tremendous are your deeds!—R. but if not, it will return to you.
Stay in the same house and eat and drink what is offered to you,
"Let all on earth worship and sing praise to you, for the laborer deserves his payment.
sing praise to your name! Do not move about from one house to another.
Come and see the works of God, Whatever town you enter and they welcome you,
his tremendous deeds among the children of Adam.—R. eat what is set before you,
cure the sick in it and say to them,
He has changed the sea into dry land; 'The kingdom of God is at hand for you.' ]
through the river they passed on foot; Whatever town you enter and they do not receive you,
therefore let us rejoice in him. go out into the streets and say,
He rules by his might forever.—R. 'The dust of your town that clings to our feet,
even that we shake off against you.'
Hear now, all you who fear God, while I declare Yet know this: the kingdom of God is at hand.
what he has done for me. I tell you,
Blessed be God who refused me not it will be more tolerable for Sodom on that day than for that town.
my prayer or his kindness!—R.
The seventy-two returned rejoicing, and said,
SECOND READING (Gal 6:14-18) "Lord, even the demons are subject to us because of your name.
Jesus said, "I have observed Satan fall like lightning from the sky.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians: Behold, I have given you the power to 'tread upon serpents' and scorpions
and upon the full force of the enemy and nothing will harm you.
BROTHERS and sisters: Nevertheless, do not rejoice because the spirits are subject to you,
May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, but rejoice because your names are written in heaven.
through which the world has been crucified to me,
and I to the world. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
For neither does circumcision mean anything, nor does uncircumcision,
but only a new creation.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 171 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS The seed is the word of God, Christ is the sower.
FIFTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A All who come to him will have life forever.—R.
GOSPEL (Mt 13:1-23 or 13:1-9)
FIRST READING (Is 55:10-11)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
THUS says the LORD:
[ ON that day, Jesus went out of the house and sat down by the sea.
Just as from the heavens
Such large crowds gathered around him
the rain and snow come down
that he got into a boat and sat down,
and do not return there
and the whole crowd stood along the shore.
till they have watered the earth,
And he spoke to them at length in parables, saying:
making it fertile and fruitful,
"A sower went out to sow.
giving seed to the one who sows
And as he sowed, some seed fell on the path,
and bread to the one who eats,
and birds came and ate it up.
so shall my word be
Some fell on rocky ground, where it had little soil.
that goes forth from my mouth;
It sprang up at once because the soil was not deep,
my word shall not return to me void,
and when the sun rose it was scorched,
but shall do my will,
and it withered for lack of roots.
achieving the end for which I sent it.
Some seed fell among thorns, and the thorns grew up and choked it.
But some seed fell on rich soil, and produced fruit,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks to be God.
a hundred or sixty or thirtyfold.
Whoever has ears ought to hear." ]
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 65:10, 11, 12-13, 14)
The disciples approached him and said,
R. (Luke 8:8) The seed that falls on good ground will yield a fruitful harvest.
"Why do you speak to them in parables?"
He said to them in reply,
You have visited the land and watered it;
"Because knowledge of the mysteries of the kingdom of heaven
greatly have you enriched it.
has been granted to you, but to them it has not been granted.
God's watercourses are filled;
To anyone who has, more will be given and he will grow rich;
you have prepared the grain.—R.
from anyone who has not, even what he has will be taken away.
This is why I speak to them in parables, because
Thus have you prepared the land: drenching its furrows,
they look but do not see and hear but do not listen or understand.
breaking up its clods,
Isaiah's prophecy is fulfilled in them, which says:
Softening it with showers,
You shall indeed hear but not understand,
blessing its yield.—R.
you shall indeed look but never see.
Gross is the heart of this people,
You have crowned the year with your bounty,
they will hardly hear with their ears,
and your paths overflow with a rich harvest;
they have closed their eyes,
The untilled meadows overflow with it,
lest they see with their eyes
and rejoicing clothes the hills.—R.
and hear with their ears
and understand with their hearts and be converted,
The fields are garmented with flocks
and I heal them.
and the valleys blanketed with grain.
They shout and sing for joy.—R.
"But blessed are your eyes, because they see,
and your ears, because they hear.
SECOND READING (Rom 8:18-23)
Amen, I say to you, many prophets and righteous people
longed to see what you see but did not see it,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
and to hear what you hear but did not hear it.
BROTHERS and sisters:
"Hear then the parable of the sower.
I consider that the sufferings of this present time are as nothing
The seed sown on the path is the one
compared with the glory to be revealed for us.
who hears the word of the kingdom without understanding it,
For creation awaits with eager expectation
and the evil one comes and steals away
the revelation of the children of God;
what was sown in his heart.
for creation was made subject to futility,
The seed sown on rocky ground
not of its own accord but because of the one who subjected it,
is the one who hears the word and receives it at once with joy.
in hope that creation itself
But he has no root and lasts only for a time.
would be set free from slavery to corruption
When some tribulation or persecution comes because of the word,
and share in the glorious freedom of the children of God.
he immediately falls away.
We know that all creation is groaning in labor pains even until now;
The seed sown among thorns is the one who hears the word,
and not only that, but we ourselves,
but then worldly anxiety and the lure of riches choke the word
who have the firstfruits of the Spirit,
and it bears no fruit.
we also groan within ourselves
But the seed sown on rich soil
as we wait for adoption, the redemption of our bodies.
is the one who hears the word and understands it,
who indeed bears fruit and yields a hundred or sixty or thirtyfold."
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
ALLELUIA
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 172 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS so that we might exist for the praise of his glory,
FIFTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B we who first hoped in Christ.
In him you also, who have heard the word of truth,
the Gospel of your salvation, and have believed in him,
FIRST READING (Am 7:12-15) were sealed with the promised holy Spirit,
which is the first installment of our inheritance
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Amos: toward redemption as God's possession, to the praise of his glory.
AMAZIAH, priest of Bethel, said to Amos, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
"Off with you, visionary, flee to the land of Judah!
There earn your bread by prophesying, ALLELUIA (cf. Eph 1:17-18)
but never again prophesy in Bethel;
for it is the king's sanctuary and a royal temple." R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Amos answered Amaziah, "I was no prophet,
nor have I belonged to a company of prophets; May the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
I was a shepherd and a dresser of sycamores. enlighten the eyes of our hearts,
The LORD took me from following the flock, and said to me, that we may know what is the hope that
Go, prophesy to my people Israel." belongs to our call.—R.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. GOSPEL (Mk 6:7-13)
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 85:9-10, 11-12, 13-14) + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
R. (8) Lord, let us see your kindness, and grant us your salvation. JESUS summoned the Twelve and began to send them out two by two
and gave them authority over unclean spirits.
I will hear what God proclaims; He instructed them to take nothing for the journey
the Lord—for he proclaims peace. but a walking stick—
Near indeed is his salvation to those who fear him, no food, no sack, no money in their belts.
glory dwelling in our land.—R. They were, however, to wear sandals
but not a second tunic.
Kindness and truth shall meet; He said to them,
justice and peace shall kiss. "Wherever you enter a house, stay there until you leave.
Truth shall spring out of the earth, Whatever place does not welcome you or listen to you,
and justice shall look down from heaven.—R. leave there and shake the dust off your feet
in testimony against them."
The Lord himself will give his benefits; So they went off and preached repentance.
our land shall yield its increase. The Twelve drove out many demons,
Justice shall walk before him, and they anointed with oil many who were sick and cured them.
and prepare the way of his steps.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
SECOND READING (Eph 1:3-14 or 1:3-10)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
[ BLESSED be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has blessed us in Christ
with every spiritual blessing in the heavens,
as he chose us in him, before the foundation of the world,
to be holy and without blemish before him.
In love he destined us for adoption to himself through Jesus Christ,
in accord with the favor of his will,
for the praise of the glory of his grace
that he granted us in the beloved.
In him we have redemption by his blood,
the forgiveness of transgressions,
in accord with the riches of his grace that he lavished upon us.
In all wisdom and insight, he has made known to us
the mystery of his will in accord with his favor
that he set forth in him as a plan for the fullness of times,
to sum up all things in Christ, in heaven and on earth. ]
In him we were also chosen,
destined in accord with the purpose of the One
who accomplishes all things according to the intention of his will,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 173 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS than a heap of purest gold;
sweeter also than syrup
FIFTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
or honey from the comb.—R.
SECOND READING (Col 1:15-20)
FIRST READING (Deut 30:10-14)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Colossians:
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy:
CHRIST Jesus is the image of the invisible God,
MOSES said to the people: the firstborn of all creation.
"If only you would heed the voice of the LORD, your God, For in him were created all things in heaven and on earth,
and keep his commandments and statutes the visible and the invisible,
that are written in this book of the law, whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers;
when you return to the LORD, your God, all things were created through him and for him.
with all your heart and all your soul. He is before all things,
and in him all things hold together.
"For this command that I enjoin on you today He is the head of the body, the church.
is not too mysterious and remote for you. He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead,
It is not up in the sky, that you should say, that in all things he himself might be preeminent.
'Who will go up in the sky to get it for us For in him all the fullness was pleased to dwell,
and tell us of it, that we may carry it out?' and through him to reconcile all things for him,
Nor is it across the sea, that you should say, making peace by the blood of his cross
'Who will cross the sea to get it for us through him, whether those on earth or those in heaven.
and tell us of it, that we may carry it out?'
No, it is something very near to you, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
already in your mouths and in your hearts;
you have only to carry it out." ALLELUIA (cf. John 6:63c, 68c)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM Your words, Lord, are Spirit and life;
you have the words of everlasting life.—R.
A. (Psalm 69:14, 17, 30-31, 33-34, 36, 37)
GOSPEL (Lk 10:25-37)
R. (cf. 33) Turn to the Lord in your need, and you will live.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
I pray to you, O Lord,
for the time of your favor, O God! THERE was a scholar of the law who stood up to test him and said,
In your great kindness answer me "Teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?"
with your constant help. Jesus said to him, "What is written in the law?
Answer me, O Lord, for bounteous is your kindness: How do you read it?"
in your great mercy turn toward me.—R. He said in reply,
You shall love the Lord, your God,
I am afflicted and in pain; with all your heart,
let your saving help, O God, protect me. with all your being,
I will praise the name of God in song, with all your strength,
and I will glorify him with thanksgiving.—R. and with all your mind,
and your neighbor as yourself."
"See, you lowly ones, and be glad; He replied to him, "You have answered correctly;
you who seek God, may your hearts revive! do this and you will live."
For the Lord hears the poor,
and his own who are in bonds he spurns not."—R. But because he wished to justify himself, he said to Jesus,
"And who is my neighbor?"
For God will save Zion Jesus replied,
and rebuild the cities of Judah. "A man fell victim to robbers
The descendants of his servants shall inherit it, as he went down from Jerusalem to Jericho.
and those who love his name shall inhabit it.—R. They stripped and beat him and went off leaving him half-dead.
A priest happened to be going down that road,
OR but when he saw him, he passed by on the opposite side.
Likewise a Levite came to the place,
B. (Psalm 19:8, 9, 10, 11) and when he saw him, he passed by on the opposite side.
But a Samaritan traveler who came upon him
R. (9a) Your words, Lord, are Spirit and life. was moved with compassion at the sight.
He approached the victim,
The law of the Lord is perfect, poured oil and wine over his wounds and bandaged them.
refreshing the soul; Then he lifted him up on his own animal,
the decree of the Lord is trustworthy, took him to an inn, and cared for him.
giving wisdom to the simple.—R. The next day he took out two silver coins
and gave them to the innkeeper with the instruction,
The precepts of the Lord are right, 'Take care of him.
rejoicing the heart; If you spend more than what I have given you,
the command of the Lord is clear, I shall repay you on my way back.'
enlightening the eye.—R. Which of these three, in your opinion,
was neighbor to the robbers' victim?"
The fear of the Lord is pure, He answered, "The one who treated him with mercy."
enduring forever; Jesus said to him, "Go and do likewise."
the ordinances of the Lord are true,
all of them just.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
They are more precious than gold,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 174 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Mt 13:24-43 or 13:24-30)
SIXTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
FIRST READING (Wis 12:13, 16-19) [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
A reading from the Book of Wisdom: [ JESUS proposed another parable to the crowds, saying:
"The kingdom of heaven may be likened
THERE is no god besides you who have the care of all, to a man who sowed good seed in his field.
that you need show you have not unjustly condemned. While everyone was asleep his enemy came
For your might is the source of justice; and sowed weeds all through the wheat, and then went off.
your mastery over all things makes you lenient to all. When the crop grew and bore fruit, the weeds appeared as well.
For you show your might when the perfection of your power is The slaves of the householder came to him and said,
disbelieved; 'Master, did you not sow good seed in your field?
and in those who know you, you rebuke temerity. Where have the weeds come from?'
But though you are master of might, you judge with clemency, He answered, 'An enemy has done this.'
and with much lenience you govern us; His slaves said to him,
for power, whenever you will, attends you. 'Do you want us to go and pull them up?'
And you taught your people, by these deeds, He replied, 'No, if you pull up the weeds
that those who are just must be kind; you might uproot the wheat along with them.
and you gave your children good ground for hope Let them grow together until harvest;
that you would permit repentance for their sins. then at harvest time I will say to the harvesters,
"First collect the weeds and tie them in bundles for burning;
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. but gather the wheat into my barn."'" ]
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 86:5-6, 9-10, 15-16) He proposed another parable to them.
"The kingdom of heaven is like a mustard seed
R. (5a) Lord, you are good and forgiving. that a person took and sowed in a field.
It is the smallest of all the seeds,
You, O Lord, are good and forgiving, yet when full-grown it is the largest of plants.
abounding in kindness to all who call upon you. It becomes a large bush,
Hearken, O Lord, to my prayer and the 'birds of the sky come and dwell in its branches.'"
and attend to the sound of my pleading.—R.
He spoke to them another parable.
All the nations you have made shall come "The kingdom of heaven is like yeast
and worship you, O Lord, that a woman took and mixed with three measures of wheat flour
and glorify your name. until the whole batch was leavened."
For you are great, and you do wondrous deeds;
you alone are God.—R. All these things Jesus spoke to the crowds in parables.
He spoke to them only in parables,
You, O Lord, are a God merciful and gracious, to fulfill what had been said through the prophet:
slow to anger, abounding in kindness and fidelity. "I will open my mouth in parables,
Turn toward me, and have pity on me; I will announce what has lain hidden from the foundation
give your strength to your servant.—R. of the world."
SECOND READING (Rom 8:26-27) Then, dismissing the crowds, he went into the house.
His disciples approached him and said,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: "Explain to us the parable of the weeds in the field."
He said in reply, "He who sows good seed is the Son of Man,
BROTHERS and sisters: the field is the world, the good seed the children of the kingdom.
The Spirit comes to the aid of our weakness; The weeds are the children of the evil one,
for we do not know how to pray as we ought, and the enemy who sows them is the devil.
but the Spirit himself intercedes with inexpressible groanings. The harvest is the end of the age, and the harvesters are angels.
And the one who searches hearts Just as weeds are collected and burned up with fire,
knows what is the intention of the Spirit, so will it be at the end of the age.
because he intercedes for the holy ones The Son of Man will send his angels,
according to God's will. and they will collect out of his kingdom
all who cause others to sin and all evildoers.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. They will throw them into the fiery furnace,
where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.
ALLELUIA (cf. Matthew 11:25) Then the righteous will shine like the sun
in the kingdom of their Father.
R. Alleluia, alleluia. Whoever has ears ought to hear."
Blessed are you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
you have revealed to little ones the mysteries of the kingdom.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 175 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS In Christ Jesus you who once were far off
SIXTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B have become near by the blood of Christ.
For he is our peace, he who made both one
FIRST READING (Jer 23:1-6) and broke down the dividing wall of enmity, through his flesh,
abolishing the law with its commandments and legal claims,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah: that he might create in himself one new person in place of the two,
thus establishing peace,
WOE to the shepherds and might reconcile both with God,
who mislead and scatter the flock of my pasture, in one body, through the cross,
says the LORD. putting that enmity to death by it.
Therefore, thus says the LORD, the God of Israel, He came and preached peace to you who were far off
against the shepherds who shepherd my people: and peace to those who were near,
You have scattered my sheep and driven them away. for through him we both have access in one Spirit to the Father.
You have not cared for them,
but I will take care to punish your evil deeds. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
I myself will gather the remnant of my flock
from all the lands to which I have driven them ALLELUIA (John 10:27)
and bring them back to their meadow;
there they shall increase and multiply. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
I will appoint shepherds for them who will shepherd them
so that they need no longer fear and tremble; My sheep hear my voice, says the Lord;
and none shall be missing, says the LORD. I know them, and they follow me.—R.
Behold, the days are coming, says the LORD, GOSPEL (Mk 6:30-34)
when I will raise up a righteous shoot to David;
as king he shall reign and govern wisely, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
he shall do what is just and right in the land.
In his days Judah shall be saved, THE apostles gathered together with Jesus
Israel shall dwell in security. and reported all they had done and taught.
This is the name they give him: He said to them,
"The LORD our justice." "Come away by yourselves to a deserted place and rest a while."
People were coming and going in great numbers,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and they had no opportunity even to eat.
So they went off in the boat by themselves to a deserted place.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 23:1-3, 3-4, 5, 6) People saw them leaving and many came to know about it.
They hastened there on foot from all the towns
R. (1) The Lord is my shepherd; there is nothing I shall want. and arrived at the place before them.
The Lord is my shepherd; I shall not want. When he disembarked and saw the vast crowd,
In verdant pastures he gives me repose; his heart was moved with pity for them,
beside restful waters he leads me; for they were like sheep without a shepherd;
he refreshes my soul.—R. and he began to teach them many things.
He guides me in right paths The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
for his name's sake.
Even though I walk in the dark valley
I fear no evil; for you are at my side
with your rod and your staff
that give me courage.—R.
You spread the table before me
in the sight of my foes;
you anoint my head with oil;
my cup overflows.—R.
Only goodness and kindness follow me
all the days of my life;
and I shall dwell in the house of the Lord
for years to come.—R.
SECOND READING (Eph 2:13-18)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 176 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS of which I am a minister
SIXTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C in accordance with God's stewardship given to me
to bring to completion for you the word of God,
the mystery hidden from ages and from generations past.
FIRST READING (Gn 18:1-10a) But now it has been manifested to his holy ones,
to whom God chose to make known the riches of the glory
A reading from the Book of Genesis: of this mystery among the Gentiles;
it is Christ in you, the hope for glory.
THE LORD appeared to Abraham by the terebinth of Mamre, It is he whom we proclaim,
as he sat in the entrance of his tent, admonishing everyone and teaching everyone with all wisdom,
while the day was growing hot. that we may present everyone perfect in Christ.
Looking up, Abraham saw three men standing nearby.
When he saw them, he ran from the entrance of the tent to greet them; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and bowing to the ground, he said:
"Sir, if I may ask you this favor, ALLELUIA (cf. Luke 8:15)
please do not go on past your servant.
Let some water be brought, that you may bathe your feet, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and then rest yourselves under the tree.
Now that you have come this close to your servant, Blessed are they who have kept the word with a generous heart
let me bring you a little food, that you may refresh yourselves; and yield a harvest through perseverance.—R.
and afterward you may go on your way."
The men replied, "Very well, do as you have said." GOSPEL (Lk 10:38-42)
Abraham hastened into the tent and told Sarah, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
"Quick, three measures of fine flour! Knead it and make rolls."
He ran to the herd, picked out a tender, choice steer, JESUS entered a village
and gave it to a servant, who quickly prepared it. where a woman whose name was Martha welcomed him.
Then Abraham got some curds and milk, She had a sister named Mary
as well as the steer that had been prepared, who sat beside the Lord at his feet listening to him speak.
and set these before the three men; Martha, burdened with much serving, came to him and said,
and he waited on them under the tree while they ate. "Lord, do you not care
that my sister has left me by myself to do the serving?
They asked Abraham, "Where is your wife Sarah?" Tell her to help me."
He replied, "There in the tent." The Lord said to her in reply,
One of them said, "I will surely return to you about this time next year, "Martha, Martha, you are anxious and worried about many things.
and Sarah will then have a son." There is need of only one thing.
Mary has chosen the better part
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and it will not be taken from her."
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 15:2-3, 3-4, 5) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
R. (1a) He who does justice will live in the presence of the Lord.
One who walks blamelessly and does justice;
who thinks the truth in his heart
and slanders not with his tongue.—R.
Who harms not his fellow man,
nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor;
by whom the reprobate is despised,
while he honors those who fear the Lord.—R.
Who lends not his money at usury
and accepts no bribe against the innocent.
One who does these things
shall never be disturbed.—R.
SECOND READING (Col 1:24-28)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Colossians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Now I rejoice in my sufferings for your sake,
and in my flesh I am filling up
what is lacking in the afflictions of Christ
on behalf of his body, which is the church,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 177 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS For those he foreknew he also predestined
SEVENTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A to be conformed to the image of his Son,
so that he might be the firstborn
among many brothers and sisters.
FIRST READING (1 Kgs 3:5, 7-12) And those he predestined he also called;
and those he called he also justified;
A reading from the first Book of Kings: and those he justified he also glorified.
THE LORD appeared to Solomon in a dream at night. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
God said, "Ask something of me and I will give it to you."
Solomon answered: ALLELUIA (cf. Matthew 11:25)
"O LORD, my God, you have made me, your servant, king
to succeed my father David; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
but I am a mere youth, not knowing at all how to act.
I serve you in the midst of the people whom you have chosen, Blessed are you Father, Lord of heaven and earth;
a people so vast that it cannot be numbered or counted. for you have revealed to little ones the mysteries of the kingdom.—R.
Give your servant, therefore, an understanding heart
to judge your people and to distinguish right from wrong. GOSPEL (Lk 13:44-52 or 13:44-46)
For who is able to govern this vast people of yours?"
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
The LORD was pleased that Solomon made this request.
So God said to him: [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
"Because you have asked for this-
not for a long life for yourself, [ JESUS said to his disciples:
nor for riches, "The kingdom of heaven is like a treasure buried in a field,
nor for the life of your enemies, which a person finds and hides again,
but for understanding so that you may know what is right- and out of joy goes and sells all that he has and buys that field.
I do as you requested. Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a merchant
I give you a heart so wise and understanding searching for fine pearls.
that there has never been anyone like you up to now, When he finds a pearl of great price,
and after you there will come no one to equal you." he goes and sells all that he has and buys it. ]
Again, the kingdom of heaven is like a net thrown into the sea,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. which collects fish of every kind.
When it is full they haul it ashore
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 119:57, 72, 76-77, 127-128, and sit down to put what is good into buckets.
129-130) What is bad they throw away.
Thus it will be at the end of the age.
R. (97a) Lord, I love your commands. The angels will go out and separate the wicked from the righteous
and throw them into the fiery furnace,
I have said, O Lord, that my part where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.
is to keep your words.
The law of your mouth is to me more precious "Do you understand all these things?"
than thousands of gold and silver pieces.—R. They answered, "Yes."
And he replied,
Let your kindness comfort me "Then every scribe who has been instructed in the kingdom of heaven
according to your promise to your servants. is like the head of a household
Let your compassion come to me that I may live, who brings from his storeroom both the new and the old."
for your law is my delight.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
For I love your command
more than gold, however fine.
For in all your precepts I go forward;
every false way I hate.—R.
Wonderful are your decrees;
therefore I observe them.
The revelation of your words sheds light,
giving understanding to the simple.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 8:28-30)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
We know that all things work for good for those who love God,
who are called according to his purpose.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 178 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Jn 6:1-15)
SEVENTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
FIRST READING (2 Kgs 4:42-44) JESUS went across the Sea of Galilee.
A large crowd followed him,
A reading from the second Book of Kings: because they saw the signs he was performing on the sick.
Jesus went up on the mountain,
A MAN came from Baal-shalishah bringing to Elisha, the man of God, and there he sat down with his disciples.
twenty barley loaves made from the firstfruits, The Jewish feast of Passover was near.
and fresh grain in the ear. When Jesus raised his eyes
Elisha said, "Give it to the people to eat." and saw that a large crowd was coming to him,
But his servant objected, he said to Philip,
"How can I set this before a hundred people?" "Where can we buy enough food for them to eat?"
Elisha insisted, "Give it to the people to eat." He said this to test him,
For thus says the LORD, because he himself knew what he was going to do.
'They shall eat and there shall be some left over.'" Philip answered him,
And when they had eaten, there was some left over, "Two hundred days' wages worth of food would not be enough
as the LORD had said. for each of them to have a little."
One of his disciples,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Andrew, the brother of Simon Peter, said to him,
"There is a boy here who has five barley loaves and two fish;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 145:10-11, 15-16, 17-18) but what good are these for so many?"
Jesus said, "Have the people recline."
R. (cf. 16) The hand of the Lord feeds us; he answers all our needs. Now there was a great deal of grass in that place.
So the men reclined, about five thousand in number.
Let all your works give you thanks, O Lord, Then Jesus took the loaves, gave thanks,
and let your faithful ones bless you. and distributed them to those who were reclining,
Let them discourse of the glory of your kingdom and also as much of the fish as they wanted.
and speak of your might.—R. When they had had their fill, he said to his disciples,
"Gather the fragments left over,
The eyes of all look hopefully to you, so that nothing will be wasted."
and you give them their food in due season; So they collected them,
you open your hand and filled twelve wicker baskets with fragments
and satisfy the desire of every living thing.—R. from the five barley loaves
that had been more than they could eat.
The Lord is just in all his ways When the people saw the sign he had done, they said,
and holy in all his works. "This is truly the Prophet, the one who is to come into the world."
The Lord is near to all who call upon him, Since Jesus knew that they were going to come and carry him off
to all who call upon him in truth.—R. to make him king,
he withdrew again to the mountain alone.
SECOND READING (Eph 4:1-6)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
I, a prisoner for the Lord,
urge you to live in a manner worthy of the call you have received,
with all humility and gentleness, with patience,
bearing with one another through love,
striving to preserve the unity of the spirit through the bond of peace:
one body and one Spirit,
as you were also called to the one hope of your call;
one Lord, one faith, one baptism;
one God and Father of all,
who is over all and through all and in all.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Luke 7:16)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
A great prophet has risen in our midst
God has visited his people.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 179 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS your kindness, O Lord, endures forever;
forsake not the work of your hands.—R.
SEVENTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
SECOND READING (Col 2:12-14)
FIRST READING (Gen 18:20-32) A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Colossians:
A reading from the Book of Genesis: BROTHERS and sisters:
You were buried with him in baptism,
IN those days, the LORD said: "The outcry against Sodom and Gomorrah in which you were also raised with him
is so great, through faith in the power of God,
and their sin so grave, who raised him from the dead.
that I must go down and see whether or not their actions And even when you were dead
fully correspond to the cry against them that comes to me. in transgressions and the uncircumcision of your flesh,
I mean to find out." he brought you to life along with him,
having forgiven us all our transgressions;
While Abraham's visitors walked on farther toward Sodom, obliterating the bond against us, with its legal claims,
the LORD remained standing before Abraham. which was opposed to us,
Then Abraham drew nearer and said: he also removed it from our midst, nailing it to the cross.
"Will you sweep away the innocent with the guilty?
Suppose there were fifty innocent people in the city; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
would you wipe out the place, rather than spare it
for the sake of the fifty innocent people within it? ALLELUIA (Rom 8:15bc)
Far be it from you to do such a thing,
to make the innocent die with the guilty R. Alleluia, alleluia.
so that the innocent and the guilty would be treated alike!
Should not the judge of all the world act with justice?" You have received a Spirit of adoption,
The LORD replied, through which we cry, Abba, Father.—R.
"If I find fifty innocent people in the city of Sodom,
I will spare the whole place for their sake." GOSPEL (Lk 11:1-13)
Abraham spoke up again:
"See how I am presuming to speak to my Lord, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
though I am but dust and ashes!
What if there are five less than fifty innocent people? JESUS was praying in a certain place, and when he had finished,
Will you destroy the whole city because of those five?" one of his disciples said to him,
He answered, "I will not destroy it, if I find forty-five there." "Lord, teach us to pray just as John taught his disciples."
But Abraham persisted, saying "What if only forty are found there?" He said to them, "When you pray, say:
He replied, "I will forbear doing it for the sake of the forty." Father, hallowed be your name,
Then Abraham said, "Let not my Lord grow impatient if I go on. your kingdom come.
What if only thirty are found there?" Give us each day our daily bread
He replied, "I will forbear doing it if I can find but thirty there." and forgive us our sins
Still Abraham went on, for we ourselves forgive everyone in debt to us,
"Since I have thus dared to speak to my Lord, and do not subject us to the final test."
what if there are no more than twenty?"
The LORD answered, "I will not destroy it, for the sake of the twenty." And he said to them, "Suppose one of you has a friend
But he still persisted: to whom he goes at midnight and says,
"Please, let not my Lord grow angry if I speak up this last time. 'Friend, lend me three loaves of bread,
What if there are at least ten there?" for a friend of mine has arrived at my house from a journey
He replied, "For the sake of those ten, I will not destroy it." and I have nothing to offer him,'
and he says in reply from within,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. 'Do not bother me; the door has already been locked
and my children and I are already in bed.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 138:1-2, 2-3, 6-7, 7-8) I cannot get up to give you anything.'
I tell you,
R. (3a) Lord, on the day I called for help, you answered me. if he does not get up to give the visitor the loaves
because of their friendship,
I will give thanks to you, O Lord, with all my heart, he will get up to give him whatever he needs
for you have heard the words of my mouth; because of his persistence.
in the presence of the angels I will sing your praise;
I will worship at your holy temple "And I tell you, ask and you will receive;
and give thanks to your name.—R. seek and you will find;
knock and the door will be opened to you.
Because of your kindness and your truth; For everyone who asks, receives;
for you have made great above all things and the one who seeks, finds;
your name and your promise. and to the one who knocks, the door will be opened.
When I called you answered me; What father among you would hand his son a snake
you built up strength within me.—R. when he asks for a fish?
Or hand him a scorpion when he asks for an egg?
The Lord is exalted, yet the lowly he sees, If you then, who are wicked,
and the proud he knows from afar. know how to give good gifts to your children,
Though I walk amid distress, you preserve me; how much more will the Father in heaven
against the anger of my enemies you raise your hand.—R. give the Holy Spirit to those who ask him?"
Your right hand saves me. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The Lord will complete what he has done for me;
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 180 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Matthew 4:4b)
EIGHTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Is 55:1-3) One does not live on bread alone,
but on every word that comes forth from the mouth of God—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
GOSPEL (Mt 14:13-21)
THUS says the LORD:
All you who are thirsty, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
come to the water!
You who have no money, WHEN Jesus heard of the death of John the Baptist,
come, receive grain and eat; he withdrew in a boat to a deserted place by himself.
Come, without paying and without cost, The crowds heard of this and followed him on foot from their towns.
drink wine and milk! When he disembarked and saw the vast crowd,
Why spend your money for what is not bread; his heart was moved with pity for them, and he cured their sick.
your wages for what fails to satisfy? When it was evening, the disciples approached him and said,
Heed me, and you shall eat well, "This is a deserted place and it is already late;
you shall delight in rich fare. dismiss the crowds so that they can go to the villages
Come to me heedfully, and buy food for themselves."
listen, that you may have life. Jesus said to them, "There is no need for them to go away;
I will renew with you the everlasting covenant, give them some food yourselves."
the benefits assured to David. But they said to him,
"Five loaves and two fish are all we have here."
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Then he said, "Bring them here to me,"
and he ordered the crowds to sit down on the grass.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 145:8-9, 15-16, 17-18) Taking the five loaves and the two fish, and looking up to heaven,
he said the blessing, broke the loaves,
R. (cf. 16) The hand of the Lord feeds us; he answers all our needs. and gave them to the disciples,
who in turn gave them to the crowds.
The Lord is gracious and merciful, They all ate and were satisfied,
slow to anger and of great kindness. and they picked up the fragments left over—
The Lord is good to all twelve wicker baskets full.
and compassionate toward all his works.—R. Those who ate were about five thousand men,
not counting women and children.
The eyes of all look hopefully to you,
and you give them their food in due season; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
you open your hand
and satisfy the desire of every living thing.—R.
The Lord is just in all his ways
and holy in all his works.
The Lord is near to all who call upon him,
to all who call upon him in truth.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 8:35, 37-39)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
What will separate us from the love of Christ?
Will anguish, or distress, or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril, or the sword?
No, in all these things we conquer overwhelmingly
through him who loved us.
For I am convinced that neither death, nor life,
nor angels, nor principalities,
nor present things, nor future things,
nor powers, nor height, nor depth,
nor any other creature will be able to separate us
from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 181 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS assuming that you have heard of him and were taught in him,
EIGHTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B as truth is in Jesus,
that you should put away the old self of your former way of life,
corrupted through deceitful desires,
FIRST READING (Ex 16:2-4, 12-15) and be renewed in the spirit of your minds,
and put on the new self,
A reading from the Book of Exodus: created in God's way in righteousness and holiness of truth.
THE whole Israelite community grumbled against Moses and Aaron. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
The Israelites said to them,
"Would that we had died at the LORD's hand in the land of Egypt, ALLELUIA (Matthew 4:4b)
as we sat by our fleshpots and ate our fill of bread!
But you had to lead us into this desert R. Alleluia, alleluia.
to make the whole community die of famine!"
One does not live on bread alone, but by every
Then the LORD said to Moses, word that comes forth from the mouth of God.—R.
"I will now rain down bread from heaven for you.
Each day the people are to go out and gather their daily portion; GOSPEL (Jn 6:24-35)
thus will I test them,
to see whether they follow my instructions or not. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
"I have heard the grumbling of the Israelites. WHEN the crowd saw that neither Jesus nor his disciples were there,
Tell them: In the evening twilight you shall eat flesh, they themselves got into boats
and in the morning you shall have your fill of bread, and came to Capernaum looking for Jesus.
so that you may know that I, the LORD, am your God." And when they found him across the sea they said to him,
"Rabbi, when did you get here?"
In the evening quail came up and covered the camp. Jesus answered them and said,
In the morning a dew lay all about the camp, "Amen, amen, I say to you,
and when the dew evaporated, there on the surface of the desert you are looking for me not because you saw signs
were fine flakes like hoarfrost on the ground. but because you ate the loaves and were filled.
On seeing it, the Israelites asked one another, "What is this?" Do not work for food that perishes
for they did not know what it was. but for the food that endures for eternal life,
But Moses told them, which the Son of Man will give you.
"This is the bread that the LORD has given you to eat." For on him the Father, God, has set his seal."
So they said to him,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. "What can we do to accomplish the works of God?"
Jesus answered and said to them,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 78:3-4, 23-24, 25, 54) "This is the work of God, that you believe in the one he sent."
So they said to him,
R. (24b) The Lord gave them bread from heaven. "What sign can you do, that we may see and believe in you?
What can you do?
What we have heard and know, Our ancestors ate manna in the desert, as it is written:
and what our fathers have declared to us, He gave them bread from heaven to eat."
We will declare to the generation to come So Jesus said to them,
the glorious deeds of the Lord and his strength "Amen, amen, I say to you,
and the wonders that he wrought.—R. it was not Moses who gave the bread from heaven;
my Father gives you the true bread from heaven.
He commanded the skies above For the bread of God is that which comes down from heaven
and opened the doors of heaven; and gives life to the world."
he rained manna upon them for food
and gave them heavenly bread.—R. So they said to him,
"Sir, give us this bread always."
Man ate the bread of angels, Jesus said to them,
food he sent them in abundance. "I am the bread of life;
And he brought them to his holy land, whoever comes to me will never hunger,
to the mountains his right hand had won.—R. and whoever believes in me will never thirst."
SECOND READING (Eph 4:17, 20-24) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
I declare and testify in the Lord
that you must no longer live as the Gentiles do,
in the futility of their minds;
that is not how you learned Christ,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 182 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS since you have taken off the old self with its practices
EIGHTEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C and have put on the new self,
which is being renewed, for knowledge,
in the image of its creator.
FIRST READING (Eccl 1:2; 2:21-23) Here there is not Greek and Jew,
circumcision and uncircumcision,
A reading from the Book of Ecclesiastes: barbarian, Scythian, slave, free;
but Christ is all and in all.
VANITY of vanities, says Qoheleth,
vanity of vanities! All things are vanity! The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Here is one who has labored with wisdom and knowledge and skill, ALLELUIA (Matthew 5:3)
and yet to another who has not labored over it,
he must leave property. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
This also is vanity and a great misfortune.
For what profit comes to man from all the toil and anxiety of heart Blessed are the poor in spirit,
with which he has labored under the sun? for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.—R.
All his days sorrow and grief are their occupation;
even at night his mind is not at rest. GOSPEL (Lk 12:13-21)
This also is vanity.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
SOMEONE in the crowd said to Jesus,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 89:3-4, 5-6, 12-13, 14, 17) "Teacher, tell my brother to share the inheritance with me."
He replied to him,
R. (1) If today you hear his voice, harden not your hearts. "Friend, who appointed me as your judge and arbitrator?"
Then he said to the crowd,
You turn man back to dust, "Take care to guard against all greed,
saying, "Return, O children of men." for though one may be rich,
For a thousand years in your sight one's life does not consist of possessions."
are as yesterday, now that it is past,
or as a watch of the night.—R. Then he told them a parable.
"There was a rich man whose land produced a bountiful harvest.
You make an end of them in their sleep; He asked himself, 'What shall I do,
the next morning they are like the changing grass, for I do not have space to store my harvest?'
Which at dawn springs up anew, And he said, 'This is what I shall do:
but by evening wilts and fades.—R. I shall tear down my barns and build larger ones.
There I shall store all my grain and other goods
Teach us to number our days aright, and I shall say to myself, "Now as for you,
that we may gain wisdom of heart. you have so many good things stored up for many years,
Return, O Lord! How long? rest, eat, drink, be merry!"'
Have pity on your servants!—R. But God said to him,
'You fool, this night your life will be demanded of you;
Fill us at daybreak with your kindness, and the things you have prepared, to whom will they belong?'
that we may shout for joy and gladness all our days. Thus will it be for all who store up treasure for themselves
And may the gracious care of the Lord our God be ours; but are not rich in what matters to God."
prosper the work of our hands for us!
Prosper the work of our hands!—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
SECOND READING (Col 3:1-5, 9-11)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Colossians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
If you were raised with Christ, seek what is above,
where Christ is seated at the right hand of God.
Think of what is above, not of what is on earth.
For you have died,
and your life is hidden with Christ in God.
When Christ your life appears,
then you too will appear with him in glory.
Put to death, then, the parts of you that are earthly:
immorality, impurity, passion, evil desire,
and the greed that is idolatry.
Stop lying to one another,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 183 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (cf. Psalm 130:5)
NINETEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (1 Kgs 19:9a, 11-13a) I wait for the Lord;
my soul waits for his word.—R.
A reading from the first Book of Kings:
GOSPEL (Mt 14:22-33)
AT the mountain of God, Horeb,
Elijah came to a cave where he took shelter. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
Then the LORD said to him,
"Go outside and stand on the mountain before the LORD; AFTER he had fed the people, Jesus made the disciples get into a boat
the LORD will be passing by." and precede him to the other side,
A strong and heavy wind was rending the mountains while he dismissed the crowds.
and crushing rocks before the LORD— After doing so, he went up on the mountain by himself to pray.
but the LORD was not in the wind. When it was evening he was there alone.
After the wind there was an earthquake— Meanwhile the boat, already a few miles offshore,
but the LORD was not in the earthquake. was being tossed about by the waves, for the wind was against it.
After the earthquake there was fire— During the fourth watch of the night,
but the LORD was not in the fire. he came toward them walking on the sea.
After the fire there was a tiny whispering sound. When the disciples saw him walking on the sea they were terrified.
When he heard this, "It is a ghost," they said, and they cried out in fear.
Elijah hid his face in his cloak At once Jesus spoke to them, "Take courage, it is I; do not be afraid."
and went and stood at the entrance of the cave. Peter said to him in reply,
"Lord, if it is you, command me to come to you on the water."
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. He said, "Come."
Peter got out of the boat and began to walk on the water toward Jesus.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 85:9, 10, 11-12, 13-14) But when he saw how strong the wind was he became frightened;
and, beginning to sink, he cried out, "Lord, save me!"
R. (8) Lord, let us see your kindness, and grant us your salvation. Immediately Jesus stretched out his hand and caught Peter,
and said to him, "O you of little faith, why did you doubt?"
I will hear what God proclaims; After they got into the boat, the wind died down.
the Lord—for he proclaims peace. Those who were in the boat did him homage, saying,
Near indeed is his salvation to those who fear him, "Truly, you are the Son of God."
glory dwelling in our land.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Kindness and truth shall meet;
justice and peace shall kiss.
Truth shall spring out of the earth,
and justice shall look down from heaven.—R.
The Lord himself will give his benefits;
our land shall yield its increase.
Justice shall walk before him,
and prepare the way of his steps.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 9:1-5)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
I speak the truth in Christ, I do not lie;
my conscience joins with the Holy Spirit in bearing me witness
that I have great sorrow and constant anguish in my heart.
For I could wish that I myself were accursed and cut off from Christ
for the sake of my own people,
my kindred according to the flesh.
They are Israelites;
theirs the adoption, the glory, the covenants,
the giving of the law, the worship, and the promises;
theirs the patriarchs, and from them,
according to the flesh, is the Christ,
who is over all, God blessed forever. Amen.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 184 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (John 6:51)
NINETEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (1 Kgs 19:4-8) I am the living bread that came down from heaven, says the Lord;
whoever eats this bread will live forever.—R.
A reading from the first Book of Kings:
GOSPEL (Jn 6:41-51)
ELIJAH went a day's journey into the desert,
until he came to a broom tree and sat beneath it. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
He prayed for death saying:
"This is enough, O LORD! THE Jews murmured about Jesus because he said,
Take my life, for I am no better than my fathers." "I am the bread that came down from heaven,"
He lay down and fell asleep under the broom tree, and they said,
but then an angel touched him and ordered him to get up and eat. "Is this not Jesus, the son of Joseph?
Elijah looked and there at his head was a hearth cake Do we not know his father and mother?
and a jug of water. Then how can he say,
After he ate and drank, he lay down again, 'I have come down from heaven'?"
but the angel of the LORD came back a second time, Jesus answered and said to them,
touched him, and ordered, "Stop murmuring among yourselves.
"Get up and eat, else the journey will be too long for you!" No one can come to me unless the Father who sent me draw him,
He got up, ate, and drank; and I will raise him on the last day.
then strengthened by that food, It is written in the prophets:
he walked forty days and forty nights to the mountain of God, Horeb. They shall all be taught by God.
Everyone who listens to my Father and learns from him comes to me.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Not that anyone has seen the Father
except the one who is from God;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 34:2-3, 4-5, 6-7, 8-9)
he has seen the Father.
Amen, amen, I say to you,
R. (9a) Taste and see the goodness of the Lord.
whoever believes has eternal life.
I am the bread of life.
I will bless the Lord at all times;
Your ancestors ate the manna in the desert, but they died;
his praise shall be ever in my mouth.
this is the bread that comes down from heaven
Let my soul glory in the Lord;
so that one may eat it and not die.
the lowly will hear me and be glad.—R.
I am the living bread that came down from heaven;
whoever eats this bread will live forever;
Glorify the Lord with me,
and the bread that I will give is my flesh for the life
Let us together extol his name.
of the world."
I sought the Lord, and he answered me
And delivered me from all my fears.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Look to him that you may be radiant with joy.
And your faces may not blush with shame.
When the afflicted man called out, the Lord heard,
And from all his distress he saved him.—R.
The angel of the Lord encamps
around those who fear him and delivers them.
Taste and see how good the Lord is;
blessed the man who takes refuge in him.—R.
SECOND READING (Eph 4:30-5:2)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God,
with which you were sealed for the day of redemption.
All bitterness, fury, anger, shouting, and reviling
must be removed from you, along with all malice.
And be kind to one another, compassionate,
forgiving one another as God has forgiven you in Christ.
So be imitators of God, as beloved children, and live in love,
as Christ loved us and handed himself over for us
as a sacrificial offering to God for a fragrant aroma.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 185 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS for he has prepared a city for them.
NINETEENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
By faith Abraham, when put to the test, offered up Isaac,
and he who had received the promises was ready to offer his only son,
of whom it was said,
FIRST READING (Wis 18:6-9) "Through Isaac descendants shall bear your name."
He reasoned that God was able to raise even from the dead,
A reading from the Book of Wisdom: and he received Isaac back as a symbol.
THE night of the passover was known beforehand to our fathers, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
that, with sure knowledge of the oaths in which they put their faith,
they might have courage. ALLELUIA (Matthew 24:42a, 44)
Your people awaited the salvation of the just
and the destruction of their foes. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
For when you punished our adversaries,
in this you glorified us whom you had summoned. Stay awake and be ready!
For in secret the holy children of the good were offering sacrifice For you do not know on what day your Lord will come.—R.
and putting into effect with one accord the divine institution.
GOSPEL (Lk 12:32-48 or 12:35-40)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 33:1, 12, 18-19, 20-22)
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
R. (12b) Blessed the people the Lord has chosen to be his own.
[ JESUS said to his disciples: ]
Exult, you just, in the Lord; "Do not be afraid any longer, little flock,
praise from the upright is fitting. for your Father is pleased to give you the kingdom.
Blessed the nation whose God is the Lord, Sell your belongings and give alms.
the people he has chosen for his own inheritance.—R. Provide money bags for yourselves that do not wear out,
an inexhaustible treasure in heaven
See, the eyes of the Lord are upon those who fear him, that no thief can reach nor moth destroy.
upon those who hope for his kindness, For where your treasure is, there also will your heart be.
To deliver them from death
and preserve them in spite of famine.—R. [ "Gird your loins and light your lamps
and be like servants who await their master's return from a wedding,
Our soul waits for the Lord, ready to open immediately when he comes and knocks.
who is our help and our shield. Blessed are those servants
May your kindness, O Lord, be upon us whom the master finds vigilant on his arrival.
who have put our hope in you.—R. Amen, I say to you, he will gird himself,
have them recline at table, and proceed to wait on them.
SECOND READING (Heb 11:1-2, 8-19 or 11:1-2, 8-12) And should he come in the second or third watch
and find them prepared in this way,
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews: blessed are those servants.
Be sure of this:
[ Shorter form in brackets. ] if the master of the house had known the hour
when the thief was coming,
[ BROTHERS and sisters: he would not have let his house be broken into.
Faith is the realization of what is hoped for You also must be prepared, for at an hour you do not expect,
and evidence of things not seen. the Son of Man will come." ]
Because of it the ancients were well attested.
Then Peter said,
By faith Abraham obeyed when he was called to go out to a place "Lord, is this parable meant for us or for everyone?"
that he was to receive as an inheritance; And the Lord replied,
he went out, not knowing where he was to go. "Who, then, is the faithful and prudent steward
By faith he sojourned in the promised land as in a foreign country, whom the master will put in charge of his servants
dwelling in tents with Isaac and Jacob, heirs of the same promise; to distribute the food allowance at the proper time?
for he was looking forward to the city with foundations, Blessed is that servant whom his master on arrival finds doing so.
whose architect and maker is God. Truly, I say to you, the master will put the servant
By faith he received power to generate, in charge of all his property.
even though he was past the normal age But if that servant says to himself,
—Sarah herself was sterile— 'My master is delayed in coming,'
for he thought that the one who had made the promise was and begins to beat the menservants and the maidservants,
trustworthy. to eat and drink and get drunk,
So it was that there came forth from one man, then that servant's master will come
himself as good as dead, on an unexpected day and at an unknown hour
descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky and will punish the servant severely
and as countless as the sands on the seashore. ] and assign him a place with the unfaithful.
That servant who knew his master's will
All these died in faith. but did not make preparations nor act in accord with his will
They did not receive what had been promised shall be beaten severely;
but saw it and greeted it from afar and the servant who was ignorant of his master's will
and acknowledged themselves to be strangers and aliens on earth, but acted in a way deserving of a severe beating
for those who speak thus show that they are seeking a homeland. shall be beaten only lightly.
If they had been thinking of the land from which they had come, Much will be required of the person entrusted with much,
they would have had opportunity to return. and still more will be demanded of the person entrusted with more."
But now they desire a better homeland, a heavenly one.
Therefore, God is not ashamed to be called their God, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 186 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (cf. Matthew 4:23)
TWENTIETH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Is 56:1, 6-7) Jesus proclaimed the Gospel of the kingdom
and cured every disease among the people.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
GOSPEL (Mt 15:21-28)
THUS says the LORD:
Observe what is right, do what is just; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
for my salvation is about to come,
my justice, about to be revealed. AT that time, Jesus withdrew to the region of Tyre and Sidon.
And behold, a Canaanite woman of that district came and called out,
The foreigners who join themselves to the LORD, "Have pity on me, Lord, Son of David!
ministering to him, My daughter is tormented by a demon."
loving the name of the LORD, But Jesus did not say a word in answer to her.
and becoming his servants— Jesus' disciples came and asked him,
all who keep the sabbath free from profanation "Send her away, for she keeps calling out after us."
and hold to my covenant, He said in reply,
them I will bring to my holy mountain "I was sent only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel."
and make joyful in my house of prayer; But the woman came and did Jesus homage, saying, "Lord, help me."
their burnt offerings and sacrifices He said in reply,
will be acceptable on my altar, "It is not right to take the food of the children
for my house shall be called and throw it to the dogs."
a house of prayer for all peoples. She said, "Please, Lord, for even the dogs eat the scraps
that fall from the table of their masters."
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Then Jesus said to her in reply,
"O woman, great is your faith!
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 67:2-3, 5, 6, 8)
Let it be done for you as you wish."
And the woman's daughter was healed from that hour.
R. (4) O God, let all the nations praise you!
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
May God have pity on us and bless us;
may he let his face shine upon us.
So may your way be known upon earth;
among all nations, your salvation.—R.
May the nations be glad and exult
because you rule the peoples in equity;
the nations on the earth you guide.—R.
May the peoples praise you, O God;
may all the peoples praise you!
May God bless us,
and may all the ends of the earth fear him!—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 11:13-15, 29-32)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
I am speaking to you Gentiles.
Inasmuch as I am the apostle to the Gentiles,
I glory in my ministry in order to make my race jealous
and thus save some of them.
For if their rejection is the reconciliation of the world,
what will their acceptance be but life from the dead?
For the gifts and the call of God are irrevocable.
Just as you once disobeyed God
but have now received mercy because of their disobedience,
so they have now disobeyed in order that,
by virtue of the mercy shown to you,
they too may now receive mercy.
For God delivered all to disobedience,
that he might have mercy upon all.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 187 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood
TWENTIETH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B remains in me and I in him, says the Lord.—R.
GOSPEL (Jn 6:51-58)
FIRST READING (Prv 9:1-6)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
A reading from the Book of Proverbs:
JESUS said to the crowds:
WISDOM has built her house, "I am the living bread that came down from heaven;
she has set up her seven columns; whoever eats this bread will live forever;
she has dressed her meat, mixed her wine, and the bread that I will give
yes, she has spread her table. is my flesh for the life of the world."
She has sent out her maidens; she calls
from the heights out over the city: The Jews quarreled among themselves, saying,
"Let whoever is simple turn in here; "How can this man give us his flesh to eat?"
To the one who lacks understanding, she says, Jesus said to them,
Come, eat of my food, "Amen, amen, I say to you,
and drink of the wine I have mixed! unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood,
Forsake foolishness that you may live; you do not have life within you.
advance in the way of understanding." Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood
has eternal life,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and I will raise him on the last day.
For my flesh is true food,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 34:2-3, 10-11, 12-13, 14-15) and my blood is true drink.
Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood
R. (9a) Taste and see the goodness of the Lord. remains in me and I in him.
Just as the living Father sent me
I will bless the Lord at all times; and I have life because of the Father,
his praise shall be ever in my mouth. so also the one who feeds on me
Let my soul glory in the Lord; will have life because of me.
the lowly will hear me and be glad.—R. This is the bread that came down from heaven.
Unlike your ancestors who ate and still died,
Glorify the Lord with me, whoever eats this bread will live forever."
let us together extol his name.
I sought the Lord, and he answered me The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and delivered me from all my fears.—R.
Look to him that you may be radiant with joy,
and your faces may not blush with shame.
When the poor one called out, the Lord heard,
and from all his distress he saved him.—R.
SECOND READING (Eph 5:15-20)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Watch carefully how you live,
not as foolish persons but as wise,
making the most of the opportunity,
because the days are evil.
Therefore, do not continue in ignorance,
but try to understand what is the will of the Lord.
And do not get drunk on wine, in which lies debauchery,
but be filled with the Spirit,
addressing one another in psalms and hymns and spiritual songs,
singing and playing to the Lord in your hearts,
giving thanks always and for everything
in the name of our Lord Jesus Christ to God the Father.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (John 6:56)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 188 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Since we are surrounded by so great a cloud of witnesses,
TWENTIETH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C let us rid ourselves of every burden and sin that clings to us
and persevere in running the race that lies before us
while keeping our eyes fixed on Jesus,
FIRST READING (Jer 38:4-6, 8-10) the leader and perfecter of faith.
For the sake of the joy that lay before him
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah: he endured the cross, despising its shame,
and has taken his seat at the right of the throne of God.
IN those days, the princes said to the king: Consider how he endured such opposition from sinners,
"Jeremiah ought to be put to death; in order that you may not grow weary and lose heart.
he is demoralizing the soldiers who are left in this city, In your struggle against sin
and all the people, by speaking such things to them; you have not yet resisted to the point of shedding blood.
he is not interested in the welfare of our people,
but in their ruin." The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
King Zedekiah answered: "He is in your power";
for the king could do nothing with them. ALLELUIA (John 10:27)
And so they took Jeremiah
and threw him into the cistern of Prince Malchiah, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
which was in the quarters of the guard,
letting him down with ropes. My sheep hear my voice, says the Lord;
There was no water in the cistern, only mud, I know them, and they follow me.—R.
and Jeremiah sank into the mud.
GOSPEL (Jn 12:49-53)
Ebed-melech, a court official,
went there from the palace and said to him: + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
"My lord king,
these men have been at fault JESUS said to his disciples:
in all they have done to the prophet Jeremiah, "I have come to set the earth on fire,
casting him into the cistern. and how I wish it were already blazing!
He will die of famine on the spot, There is a baptism with which I must be baptized,
for there is no more food in the city." and how great is my anguish until it is accomplished!
Then the king ordered Ebed-melech the Cushite Do you think that I have come to establish peace on the earth?
to take three men along with him, No, I tell you, but rather division.
and draw the prophet Jeremiah out of the cistern before From now on a household of five will be divided,
he should die. three against two and two against three;
a father will be divided against his son
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and a son against his father,
a mother against her daughter
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 40:2, 3, 4, 18) and a daughter against her mother,
a mother-in-law against her daughter-in-law
R. (14b) Lord, come to my aid! and a daughter-in-law against her mother-in-law."
I have waited, waited for the Lord, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and he stooped toward me.—R.
The Lord heard my cry.
He drew me out of the pit of destruction,
out of the mud of the swamp;
he set my feet upon a crag;
he made firm my steps.—R.
And he put a new song into my mouth,
a hymn to our God.
Many shall look on in awe
and trust in the Lord.—R.
Though I am afflicted and poor,
yet the Lord thinks of me.
You are my help and my deliverer;
O my God, hold not back!—R.
SECOND READING (Heb 12:1-4)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 189 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Mt 16:13-20)
TWENTY-FIRST SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
FIRST READING (Is 22:19-23) JESUS went into the region of Caesarea Philippi and
he asked his disciples,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: "Who do people say that the Son of Man is?"
They replied, "Some say John the Baptist, others Elijah,
THUS says the Lord to Shebna, master of the palace: still others Jeremiah or one of the prophets."
"I will thrust you from your office He said to them, "who do you say that I am?"
and pull you down from your station. Simon Peter said in reply,
On that day I will summon my servant "You are the Christ, the Son of the living God."
Eliakim, son of Hilkiah; Jesus said to him in reply,
I will clothe him with your robe, "Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah.
and gird him with your sash, For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my heavenly Father.
and give over to him your authority. And so I say to you, you are Peter,
He shall be a father to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and upon this rock I will build my church,
and to the house of Judah. and the gates of the netherworld shall not prevail against it.
I will place the key of the House of David on Eliakim's shoulder; I will give you the keys to the kingdom of heaven.
when he opens, no one shall shut Whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven;
when he shuts, no one shall open. and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven."
I will fix him like a peg in a sure spot, Then he strictly ordered his disciples
to be a place of honor for his family." to tell no one that he was the Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 138:1-2, 2-3, 6, 8)
R. (8bc) Lord, your love is eternal; do not forsake the work of your hands.
I will give thanks to you, O Lord, with all my heart,
for you have heard the words of my mouth;
in the presence of the angels I will sing your praise;
I will worship at your holy temple.—R.
I will give thanks to your name,
because of your kindness and your truth:
When I called, you answered me;
you built up strength within me.—R.
The Lord is exalted, yet the lowly he sees,
and the proud he knows from afar.
Your kindness, O Lord, endures forever;
forsake not the work of your hands.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 11:33-36)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
OH, the depth of the riches and wisdom and knowledge of God!
How inscrutable are his judgments and how unsearchable his ways!
For who has known the mind of the Lord
or who has been his counselor?
Or who has given the Lord anything
that he may be repaid?
For from him and through him and for him are all things.
To him be glory forever. Amen.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Matthew 16:18)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
You are Peter and upon this rock I will build my Church
and the gates of the netherworld shall not prevail against it.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 190 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS
TWENTY-FIRST SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B Be subordinate to one another out of reverence for Christ.
Wives should be subordinate to their husbands as to the Lord.
For the husband is head of his wife
FIRST READING (Jos 24:1-2a, 15-17, 18b) just as Christ is head of the church,
he himself the savior of the body.
A reading from the Book of Joshua: As the church is subordinate to Christ,
so wives should be subordinate to their husbands in everything.
JOSHUA gathered together all the tribes of Israel at Shechem, [ Husbands, love your wives,
summoning their elders, their leaders, even as Christ loved the church
their judges, and their officers. and handed himself over for her to sanctify her,
When they stood in ranks before God, cleansing her by the bath of water with the word,
Joshua addressed all the people: that he might present to himself the church in splendor,
"If it does not please you to serve the LORD, without spot or wrinkle or any such thing,
decide today whom you will serve, that she might be holy and without blemish.
the gods your fathers served beyond the River So also husbands should love their wives as their own bodies.
or the gods of the Amorites in whose country you are now dwelling. He who loves his wife loves himself.
As for me and my household, we will serve the LORD." For no one hates his own flesh
but rather nourishes and cherishes it,
But the people answered, even as Christ does the church,
"Far be it from us to forsake the LORD because we are members of his body.
for the service of other gods. For this reason a man shall leave his father and his mother
For it was the LORD, our God, and be joined to his wife,
who brought us and our fathers up out of the land of Egypt, and the two shall become one flesh.
out of a state of slavery. This is a great mystery,
He performed those great miracles before our very eyes but I speak in reference to Christ and the church. ]
and protected us along our entire journey
and among the peoples through whom we passed. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Therefore we also will serve the LORD, for he is our God."
ALLELUIA (John 6:63c, 68c)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 34:2-3, 16-17, 18-19, 20-21, 22-23)
Your words, Lord, are Spirit and life;
R. (9a) Taste and see the goodness of the Lord. you have the words of everlasting life.—R.
I will bless the Lord at all times; GOSPEL (Jn 6:60-69)
his praise shall be ever in my mouth.
Let my soul glory in the Lord; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
the lowly will hear me and be glad.—R.
MANY of Jesus'disciples who were listening said,
The Lord has eyes for the just, "This saying is hard; who can accept it?"
and ears for their cry. Since Jesus knew that his disciples were murmuring about this,
The Lord confronts the evildoers, he said to them, "Does this shock you?
to destroy remembrance of them from the earth. What if you were to see the Son of Man ascending
Taste and see the goodness of the Lord.—R. to where he was before?
It is the spirit that gives life,
When the just cry out, the Lord hears them, while the flesh is of no avail.
and from all their distress he rescues them. The words I have spoken to you are Spirit and life.
The Lord is close to the brokenhearted; But there are some of you who do not believe."
and those who are crushed in spirit he saves.—R. Jesus knew from the beginning the ones who would not believe
and the one who would betray him.
Many are the troubles of the just one, And he said,
but out of them all the Lord delivers him; "For this reason I have told you that no one can come to me
he watches over all his bones; unless it is granted him by my Father."
not one of them shall be broken.—R.
As a result of this,
SECOND READING (Eph 5:21-32 or 5:2a, 25-32) many of his disciples returned to their former way of life
and no longer accompanied him.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians: Jesus then said to the Twelve, "Do you also want to leave?"
Simon Peter answered him, "Master, to whom shall we go?
[ Shorter form in brackets. ] You have the words of eternal life.
We have come to believe
[ BROTHERS and sisters: and are convinced that you are the Holy One of God."
(Shorter form only adds vs. 2a: Live in love, as Christ loved us.) ] The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 191 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (John 14:6)
TWENTY-FIRST SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Is 66:18-21) I am the way, the truth and the life, says the Lord;
no one comes to the Father, except through me.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
GOSPEL (Lk 13:22-30)
THUS says the LORD:
I know their works and their thoughts, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
and I come to gather nations of every language;
they shall come and see my glory. JESUS passed through towns and villages,
I will set a sign among them; teaching as he went and making his way to Jerusalem.
from them I will send fugitives to the nations: Someone asked him,
to Tarshish, Put and Lud, Mosoch, Tubal and Javan, "Lord, will only a few people be saved?"
to the distant coastlands He answered them,
that have never heard of my fame, or seen my glory; "Strive to enter through the narrow gate,
and they shall proclaim my glory among the nations. for many, I tell you, will attempt to enter
They shall bring all your brothers and sisters from all the nations but will not be strong enough.
as an offering to the LORD, After the master of the house has arisen and locked the door,
on horses and in chariots, in carts, upon mules and dromedaries, then will you stand outside knocking and saying,
to Jerusalem, my holy mountain, says the LORD, 'Lord, open the door for us.'
just as the Israelites bring their offering He will say to you in reply,
to the house of the LORD in clean vessels. 'I do not know where you are from.'
Some of these I will take as priests and Levites, says the LORD. And you will say,
'We ate and drank in your company and you taught in our streets.'
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Then he will say to you,
'I do not know where you are from.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 117:1, 2) Depart from me, all you evildoers!'
And there will be wailing and grinding of teeth
R. (Mark 16:15) Go out to all the world and tell the Good News. when you see Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob
or: and all the prophets in the kingdom of God
R. Alleluia. and you yourselves cast out.
And people will come from the east and the west
Praise the Lord, all you nations; and from the north and the south
glorify him, all you peoples!—R. and will recline at table in the kingdom of God.
For behold, some are last who will be first,
For steadfast is his kindness toward us, and some are first who will be last."
and the fidelity of the Lord endures forever.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
SECOND READING (Heb 12:5-7, 11-13)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrew:
BROTHERS and sisters,
You have forgotten the exhortation addressed to you as children:
"My son, do not disdain the discipline of the Lord
or lose heart when reproved by him;
for whom the Lord loves, he disciplines;
he scourges every son he acknowledges."
Endure your trials as "discipline";
God treats you as sons.
For what "son" is there whom his father does not discipline?
At the time,
all discipline seems a cause not for joy but for pain,
yet later it brings the peaceful fruit of righteousness
to those who are trained by it.
So strengthen your drooping hands and your weak knees.
Make straight paths for your feet,
that what is lame may not be disjointed but healed.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 192 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS May the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A enlighten the eyes of our hearts,
that we may know what is the hope
that belongs to our call.—R.
FIRST READING (Jer 20:7-9)
GOSPEL (Mt 16:21-27)
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah:
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
YOU duped me, O LORD, and I let myself be duped;
you were too strong for me, and you triumphed. JESUS began to show his disciples
All the day I am an object of laughter; that he must go to Jerusalem and suffer greatly
everyone mocks me. from the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes,
and be killed and on the third day be raised.
Whenever I speak, I must cry out, Then Peter took Jesus aside and began to rebuke him,
violence and outrage is my message; "God forbid, Lord! No such thing shall ever happen to you."
the word of the LORD has brought me He turned and said to Peter,
derision and reproach all the day. "Get behind me, Satan! You are an obstacle to me.
You are thinking not as God does, but as human beings do."
I say to myself, I will not mention him,
I will speak in his name no more. Then Jesus said to his disciples,
But then it becomes like fire burning in my heart, "Whoever wishes to come after me must deny himself,
imprisoned in my bones; take up his cross, and follow me.
I grow weary holding it in, I cannot endure it. For whoever wishes to save his life will lose it,
but whoever loses his life for my sake will find it.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. What profit would there be for one to gain the whole world
and forfeit his life?
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 63:2, 3-4, 5-6, 8-9) Or what can one give in exchange for his life?
For the Son of Man will come with his angels in his Father's glory,
R. (2b) My soul is thirsting for you, O Lord my God. and then he will repay all according to his conduct."
O God, you are my God whom I seek; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
for you my flesh pines and my soul thirsts
like the earth, parched, lifeless and without water.—R.
Thus have I gazed toward you in the sanctuary
to see your power and your glory,
For your kindness is a greater good than life;
my lips shall glorify you.—R.
Thus will I bless you while I live;
lifting up my hands, I will call upon your name.
As with the riches of a banquet shall my soul be satisfied,
and with exultant lips my mouth shall praise you.—R.
You are my help,
and in the shadow of your wings I shout for joy.
My soul clings fast to you;
your right hand upholds me.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 12:1-2)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
I URGE you, brothers and sisters, by the mercies of God,
to offer your bodies as a living sacrifice,
holy and pleasing to God, your spiritual worship.
Do not conform yourselves to this age
but be transformed by the renewal of your mind,
that you may discern what is the will of God,
what is good and pleasing and perfect.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (cf. Eph 1:17-18)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 193 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and to keep oneself unstained by the world.
TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Deut 4:1-2, 6-8) ALLELUIA (Jas 1:18)
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
MOSES said to the people: The Father willed to give us birth by the word of truth
"Now, Israel, hear the statutes and decrees that we may be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.—R.
which I am teaching you to observe,
that you may live, and may enter in and take possession of the land GOSPEL (Mk 7:1-8, 14-15, 21-23)
which the LORD, the God of your fathers, is giving you.
In your observance of the commandments of the LORD, your God, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
which I enjoin upon you,
you shall not add to what I command you nor subtract from it. WHEN the Pharisees with some scribes who had come from Jerusalem
Observe them carefully, gathered around Jesus,
for thus will you give evidence they observed that some of his disciples ate their meals
of your wisdom and intelligence to the nations, with unclean, that is, unwashed, hands.
who will hear of all these statutes and say, —For the Pharisees and, in fact, all Jews,
'This great nation is truly a wise and intelligent people.' do not eat without carefully washing their hands,
For what great nation is there keeping the tradition of the elders.
that has gods so close to it as the LORD, our God, is to us And on coming from the marketplace
whenever we call upon him? they do not eat without purifying themselves.
Or what great nation has statutes and decrees And there are many other things that they have traditionally observed,
that are as just as this whole law the purification of cups and jugs and kettles and beds.—
which I am setting before you today?" So the Pharisees and scribes questioned him,
"Why do your disciples not follow the tradition of the elders
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. but instead eat a meal with unclean hands?"
He responded,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 15:2-3, 3-4, 4-5) "Well did Isaiah prophesy about you hypocrites, as it is written:
This people honors me with their lips,
R. (1a) One who does justice will live in the presence of the Lord. but their hearts are far from me;
in vain do they worship me,
Whoever walks blamelessly and does justice; teaching as doctrines human precepts.
who thinks the truth in his heart You disregard God's commandment but cling to human tradition."
and slanders not with his tongue.—R.
He summoned the crowd again and said to them,
Who harms not his fellow man, "Hear me, all of you, and understand.
nor takes up a reproach against his neighbor; Nothing that enters one from outside can defile that person;
by whom the reprobate is despised, but the things that come out from within are what defile.
while he honors those who fear the Lord.—R.
"From within people, from their hearts,
Who lends not his money at usury come evil thoughts, unchastity, theft, murder,
and accepts no bribe against the innocent. adultery, greed, malice, deceit,
Whoever does these things licentiousness, envy, blasphemy, arrogance, folly.
shall never be disturbed.—R. All these evils come from within and they defile."
SECOND READING (Jas 1:17-18, 21b-22, 27) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the Letter of Saint James:
DEAREST brothers and sisters:
All good giving and every perfect gift is from above,
coming down from the Father of lights,
with whom there is no alteration or shadow caused by change.
He willed to give us birth by the word of truth
that we may be a kind of firstfruits of his creatures.
Humbly welcome the word that has been planted in you
and is able to save your souls.
Be doers of the word and not hearers only, deluding yourselves.
Religion that is pure and undefiled before God and the Father is this:
to care for orphans and widows in their affliction
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 194 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Take my yoke upon you, says the Lord,
TWENTY-SECOND SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C and learn from me, for I am meek and humble of heart.—R.
GOSPEL (Lk 14:1, 7-14)
FIRST READING (Sir 3:17-18, 20, 28-29)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
A reading from the Book of Sirach:
ON a sabbath Jesus went to dine
MY child, conduct your affairs with humility, at the home of one of the leading Pharisees,
and you will be loved more than a giver of gifts. and the people there were observing him carefully.
Humble yourself the more, the greater you are,
and you will find favor with God. He told a parable to those who had been invited,
What is too sublime for you, seek not, noticing how they were choosing the places of honor at the table.
into things beyond your strength search not. "When you are invited by someone to a wedding banquet,
The mind of a sage appreciates proverbs, do not recline at table in the place of honor.
and an attentive ear is the joy of the wise. A more distinguished guest than you may have been invited by him,
Water quenches a flaming fire, and the host who invited both of you may approach you and say,
and alms atone for sins. 'Give your place to this man,'
and then you would proceed with embarrassment
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. to take the lowest place.
Rather, when you are invited,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 68:4-5, 6-7, 10-11) go and take the lowest place
so that when the host comes to you he may say,
R. (cf. 11b) God, in your goodness, you have made a home for the poor. 'My friend, move up to a higher position.'
Then you will enjoy the esteem of your companions at the table.
The just rejoice and exult before God; For every one who exalts himself will be humbled,
they are glad and rejoice. but the one who humbles himself will be exalted."
Sing to God, chant praise to his name; Then he said to the host who invited him,
whose name is the Lord.—R. "When you hold a lunch or a dinner,
do not invite your friends or your brothers
The father of orphans and the defender of widows or your relatives or your wealthy neighbors,
is God in his holy dwelling. in case they may invite you back and you have repayment.
God gives a home to the forsaken; Rather, when you hold a banquet,
he leads forth prisoners to prosperity.—R. invite the poor, the crippled, the lame, the blind;
blessed indeed will you be because of their inability to repay you.
A bountiful rain you showered down, O God, upon your inheritance; For you will be repaid at the resurrection of the righteous."
you restored the land when it languished;
your flock settled in it; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
in your goodness, O God, you provided it for the needy.—R.
SECOND READING (Heb 12:18-19, 22-24a)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
BROTHERS and sisters:
You have not approached that which could be touched
and a blazing fire and gloomy darkness
and storm and a trumpet blast
and a voice speaking words such that those who heard
begged that no message be further addressed to them.
No, you have approached Mount Zion
and the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem,
and countless angels in festal gathering,
and the assembly of the firstborn enrolled in heaven,
and God the judge of all,
and the spirits of the just made perfect,
and Jesus, the mediator of a new covenant,
and the sprinkled blood that speaks more eloquently than
that of Abel.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Matthew 11:29ab)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 195 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Mt 18:15-20)
TWENTY-THIRD SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
FIRST READING (Ez 33:7-9) JESUS said to his disciples:
“If your brother sins against you,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel: go and tell him his fault between you and him alone.
If he listens to you, you have won over your brother.
THUS says the LORD: If he does not listen,
You, son of man, I have appointed watchman for the house of Israel; take one or two others along with you,
when you hear me say anything, you shall warn them for me. so that ‘every fact may be established
If I tell the wicked, “O wicked one, you shall surely die,” on the testimony of two or three witnesses.’
and you do not speak out to dissuade the wicked from his way, If he refuses to listen to them, tell the church.
the wicked shall die for his guilt, If he refuses to listen even to the church,
but I will hold you responsible for his death. then treat him as you would a Gentile or a tax collector.
But if you warn the wicked, Amen, I say to you,
trying to turn him from his way, whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven,
and he refuses to turn from his way, and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.
he shall die for his guilt, Again, amen, I say to you,
but you shall save yourself. if two of you agree on earth
about anything for which they are to pray,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. it shall be granted to them by my heavenly Father.
For where two or three are gathered together in my name,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 95:1-2, 6-7, 8-9) there am I in the midst of them.”
R. (8) If today you hear his voice, harden not your hearts. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Come, let us sing joyfully to the Lord;
let us acclaim the rock of our salvation.
Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving;
let us joyfully sing psalms to him.—R.
Come, let us bow down in worship;
let us kneel before the Lord who made us.
For he is our God,
and we are the people he shepherds, the flock he guides.—R.
Oh, that today you would hear his voice:
“Harden not your hearts as at Meribah,
as in the day of Massah in the desert,
Where your fathers tempted me;
they tested me though they had seen my works.”—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 13:8-10)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Owe nothing to anyone, except to love one another;
for the one who loves another has fulfilled the law.
The commandments, “You shall not commit adultery;
you shall not kill; you shall not steal; you shall not covet,”
and whatever other commandment there may be,
are summed up in this saying, namely,
“You shall love your neighbor as yourself.”
Love does no evil to the neighbor;
hence, love is the fulfillment of the law.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (2 Cor 5:19)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ
and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 196 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (cf. Matthew 4:23)
TWENTY-THIRD SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Is 35:4-7a) Jesus proclaimed the Gospel of the kingdom
and cured every disease among the people.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
GOSPEL (Mk 7:31-37)
THUS says the LORD:
Say to those whose hearts are frightened: + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
Be strong, fear not!
Here is your God, AGAIN Jesus left the district of Tyre
he comes with vindication; and went by way of Sidon to the Sea of Galilee,
with divine recompense into the district of the Decapolis.
he comes to save you. And people brought to him a deaf man who had a
Then will the eyes of the blind be opened, speech impediment
the ears of the deaf be cleared; and begged him to lay his hand on him.
then will the lame leap like a stag, He took him off by himself away from the crowd.
then the tongue of the mute will sing. He put his finger into the man's ears
Streams will burst forth in the desert, and, spitting, touched his tongue;
and rivers in the steppe. then he looked up to heaven and groaned, and said to him,
The burning sands will become pools, “Ephphatha!” that is, “Be opened!”
and the thirsty ground, springs of water. And immediately the man's ears were opened,
his speech impediment was removed,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and he spoke plainly.
He ordered them not to tell anyone.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 146:7, 8-9, 9-10)
But the more he ordered them not to,
the more they proclaimed it.
R. (1b) Praise the Lord, my soul!
They were exceedingly astonished and they said,
or:
“He has done all things well.
R. Alleluia.
He makes the deaf hear and the mute speak.”
The God of Jacob keeps faith forever,
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
secures justice for the oppressed,
gives food to the hungry.
The Lord sets captives free.—R.
The Lord gives sight to the blind;
the Lord raises up those who were bowed down.
The Lord loves the just;
the Lord protects strangers.—R.
The fatherless and the widow the Lord sustains,
but the way of the wicked he thwarts.
The Lord shall reign forever;
your God, O Zion, through all generations. Alleluia.—R.
SECOND READING (Jas 2:1-5)
A reading from the Letter of Saint James:
MY brothers and sisters, show no partiality
as you adhere to the faith in our glorious Lord Jesus Christ.
For if a man with gold rings and fine clothes
comes into your assembly,
and a poor person in shabby clothes also comes in,
and you pay attention to the one wearing the fine clothes
and say, “Sit here, please,”
while you say to the poor one, “Stand there,” or “Sit at my feet,”
have you not made distinctions among yourselves
and become judges with evil designs?
Listen, my beloved brothers and sisters.
Did not God choose those who are poor in the world
to be rich in faith and heirs of the kingdom
that he promised to those who love him?
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 197 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS no longer as a slave
TWENTY-THIRD SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C but more than a slave, a brother,
beloved especially to me, but even more so to you,
as a man and in the Lord.
FIRST READING (Wis 9:13-18b) So if you regard me as a partner, welcome him as you would me.
A reading from the Book of Wisdom: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
WHO can know God's counsel, ALLELUIA (Psalm 119:135)
or who can conceive what the LORD intends?
For the deliberations of mortals are timid, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and unsure are our plans.
For the corruptible body burdens the soul Let your face shine upon your servant;
and the earthen shelter weighs down the mind that has and teach me your laws.—R.
many concerns.
And scarce do we guess the things on earth, GOSPEL (Lk 14:25-33)
and what is within our grasp we find with difficulty;
but when things are in heaven, who can search them out? + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
Or who ever knew your counsel, except you had given wisdom
and sent your holy spirit from on high? GREAT crowds were traveling with Jesus,
And thus were the paths of those on earth made straight. and he turned and addressed them,
“If anyone comes to me without hating his father and mother,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. wife and children, brothers and sisters,
and even his own life,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 90:3-4, 5-6, 12-13, 14-17) he cannot be my disciple.
Whoever does not carry his own cross and come after me
R. (1) In every age, O Lord, you have been our refuge. cannot be my disciple.
Which of you wishing to construct a tower
You turn man back to dust, does not first sit down and calculate the cost
saying, “Return, O children of men.” to see if there is enough for its completion?
For a thousand years in your sight Otherwise, after laying the foundation
are as yesterday, now that it is past, and finding himself unable to finish the work
or as a watch of the night.—R. the onlookers should laugh at him and say,
‘This one began to build but did not have the resources to finish.’
You make an end of them in their sleep; Or what king marching into battle would not first sit down
the next morning they are like the changing grass, and decide whether with ten thousand troops
Which at dawn springs up anew, he can successfully oppose another king
but by evening wilts and fades.—R. advancing upon him with twenty thousand troops?
But if not, while he is still far away,
Teach us to number our days aright, he will send a delegation to ask for peace terms.
that we may gain wisdom of heart. In the same way,
Return, O Lord! How long? anyone of you who does not renounce all his possessions
Have pity on your servants!—R. cannot be my disciple.”
Fill us at daybreak with your kindness, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
that we may shout for joy and gladness all our days.
And may the gracious care of the Lord our God be ours;
prosper the work of our hands for us!
Prosper the work of our hands!—R.
SECOND READING (Phlm 9-10, 12-17)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to Philemon:
I, PAUL, an old man,
and now also a prisoner for Christ Jesus,
urge you on behalf of my child Onesimus,
whose father I have become in my imprisonment;
I am sending him, that is, my own heart, back to you.
I should have liked to retain him for myself,
so that he might serve me on your behalf
in my imprisonment for the gospel,
but I did not want to do anything without your consent,
so that the good you do might not be forced but voluntary.
Perhaps this is why he was away from you for a while,
that you might have him back forever,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 198 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (John 13:34)
TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Sir 27:30-28:9) I give you a new commandment, says the Lord;
love one another as I have loved you.—R.
A reading from the Book of Sirach:
GOSPEL (Mt 18:21-35)
WRATH and anger are hateful things,
yet the sinner hugs them tight. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
The vengeful will suffer the LORD's vengeance,
for he remembers their sins in detail. PETER approached Jesus and asked him,
Forgive your neighbor's injustice; "Lord, if my brother sins against me,
then when you pray, your own sins will be forgiven. how often must I forgive?
Could anyone nourish anger against another As many as seven times?"
and expect healing from the LORD? Jesus answered, "I say to you, not seven times but seventy-seven times.
Could anyone refuse mercy to another like himself, That is why the kingdom of heaven may be likened to a king
can he seek pardon for his own sins? who decided to settle accounts with his servants.
If one who is but flesh cherishes wrath, When he began the accounting,
who will forgive his sins? a debtor was brought before him who owed him a huge amount.
Remember your last days, set enmity aside; Since he had no way of paying it back,
remember death and decay, and cease from sin! his master ordered him to be sold,
Think of the commandments, hate not your neighbor; along with his wife, his children, and all his property,
remember the Most High's covenant, and overlook faults. in payment of the debt.
At that, the servant fell down, did him homage, and said,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. 'Be patient with me, and I will pay you back in full.'
Moved with compassion the master of that servant
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 103:1-2, 3-4, 9-10, 11-12) let him go and forgave him the loan.
When that servant had left, he found one of his fellow servants
R. (8) The Lord is kind and merciful, slow to anger, and rich who owed him a much smaller amount.
in compassion. He seized one of his fellow servants and started to choke him, demanding,
'Pay back what you owe.'
Bless the Lord, O my soul; Falling to his knees, his fellow servant begged him,
and all my being, bless his holy name. 'Be patient with me, and I will pay you back.'
Bless the Lord, O my soul, But he refused.
and forget not all his benefits.—R. Instead, he had the fellow servant put in prison
until he paid back the debt.
He pardons all your iniquities, Now when his fellow servants saw what had happened,
heals all your ills. they were deeply disturbed, and went to their master
redeems your life from destruction, and reported the whole affair.
he crowns you with kindness and compassion.—R. His master summoned him and said to him, 'You wicked servant!
I forgave you your entire debt because you begged me to.
He will not always chide, Should you not have had pity on your fellow servant,
nor does he keep his wrath forever. as I had pity on you?'
Not according to our sins does he deal with us, Then in anger his master handed him over to the torturers
nor does he requite us according to our crimes.—R. until he should pay back the whole debt.
So will my heavenly Father do to you,
For as the heavens are high above the earth, unless each of you forgives your brother from your heart."
so surpassing is his kindness toward those who fear him.
As far as the east is from the west, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
so far has he put our transgressions from us.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 14:7-9)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
None of us lives for oneself, and no one dies for oneself.
For if we live, we live for the Lord,
and if we die, we die for the Lord;
so then, whether we live or die, we are the Lord's.
For this is why Christ died and came to life,
that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 199 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and one of you says to them,
TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B "Go in peace, keep warm, and eat well,"
but you do not give them the necessities of the body,
what good is it?
FIRST READING (Is 50:5-9a) So also faith of itself,
if it does not have works, is dead.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
Indeed someone might say,
THE Lord GOD opens my ear that I may hear; "You have faith and I have works."
and I have not rebelled, Demonstrate your faith to me without works,
have not turned back. and I will demonstrate my faith to you from my works.
I gave my back to those who beat me,
my cheeks to those who plucked my beard; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
my face I did not shield
from buffets and spitting. ALLELUIA (Galatians 6:14)
The Lord GOD is my help, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
therefore I am not disgraced;
I have set my face like flint, May I never boast except in the cross of our Lord
knowing that I shall not be put to shame. through which the world has been crucified to me
He is near who upholds my right; and I to the world.—R.
if anyone wishes to oppose me,
let us appear together. GOSPEL (Mk 8:27-35)
Who disputes my right?
Let that man confront me. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
See, the Lord GOD is my help;
who will prove me wrong? JESUS and his disciples set out
for the villages of Caesarea Philippi.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Along the way he asked his disciples,
"Who do people say that I am?"
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 114:1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 8-9) They said in reply,
"John the Baptist, others Elijah,
R. (9) I will walk before the Lord, in the land of the living. still others one of the prophets."
or: And he asked them,
R. Alleluia. "But who do you say that I am?"
Peter said to him in reply,
I love the Lord because he has heard "You are the Christ."
my voice in supplication, Then he warned them not to tell anyone about him.
Because he has inclined his ear to me
the day I called.—R. He began to teach them
that the Son of Man must suffer greatly
The cords of death encompassed me; and be rejected by the elders, the chief priests, and the scribes,
the snares of the netherworld seized upon me; and be killed, and rise after three days.
I fell into distress and sorrow, He spoke this openly.
And I called upon the name of the Lord, Then Peter took him aside and began to rebuke him.
"O Lord, save my life!"—R. At this he turned around and, looking at his disciples,
rebuked Peter and said, "Get behind me, Satan.
Gracious is the Lord and just; You are thinking not as God does, but as human beings do."
yes, our God is merciful.
The Lord keeps the little ones; He summoned the crowd with his disciples and said to them,
I was brought low, and he saved me.—R. "Whoever wishes to come after me must deny himself,
take up his cross, and follow me.
For he has freed my soul from death, For whoever wishes to save his life will lose it,
my eyes from tears, my feet from stumbling. but whoever loses his life for my sake
I shall walk before the Lord and that of the gospel will save it."
in the land of the living.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
SECOND READING (Jas 2:14-18)
A reading from the Letter of Saint James:
WHAT good is it, my brothers and sisters,
if someone says he has faith but does not have works?
Can that faith save him?
If a brother or sister has nothing to wear
and has no food for the day,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 200 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C [ TAX collectors and sinners were all drawing near to listen to Jesus,
but the Pharisees and scribes began to complain, saying,
"This man welcomes sinners and eats with them."
So to them he addressed this parable.
FIRST READING (Ex 32:7-11, 13-14) "What man among you having a hundred sheep and losing one of them
would not leave the ninety-nine in the desert
A reading from the Book of Exodus: and go after the lost one until he finds it?
And when he does find it,
THE LORD said to Moses, he sets it on his shoulders with great joy
"Go down at once to your people, and, upon his arrival home,
whom you brought out of the land of Egypt, he calls together his friends and neighbors and says to them,
for they have become depraved. 'Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep.'
They have soon turned aside from the way I pointed out to them, I tell you, in just the same way
making for themselves a molten calf and worshiping it, there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents
sacrificing to it and crying out, than over ninety-nine righteous people
'This is your God, O Israel, who have no need of repentance.
who brought you out of the land of Egypt!'
I see how stiff-necked this people is," continued the LORD to Moses. "Or what woman having ten coins and losing one
"Let me alone, then, would not light a lamp and sweep the house,
that my wrath may blaze up against them to consume them. searching carefully until she finds it?
Then I will make of you a great nation." And when she does find it,
she calls together her friends and neighbors
But Moses implored the LORD, his God, saying, and says to them,
"Why, O LORD, should your wrath blaze up against your own people, 'Rejoice with me because I have found the coin that I lost.'
whom you brought out of the land of Egypt In just the same way, I tell you,
with such great power and with so strong a hand? there will be rejoicing among the angels of God
Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, over one sinner who repents." ]
and how you swore to them by your own self, saying,
'"I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky; Then he said,
and all this land that I promised, "A man had two sons, and the younger son said to his father,
I will give your descendants as their perpetual heritage.'" 'Father give me the share of your estate that should come to me.'
So the LORD relented in the punishment So the father divided the property between them.
he had threatened to inflict on his people. After a few days, the younger son collected all his belongings
and set off to a distant country
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. where he squandered his inheritance on a life of dissipation.
When he had freely spent everything,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 51:3-4, 12-13, 17, 19) a severe famine struck that country,
and he found himself in dire need.
R. (Luke 15:18) I will rise and go to my father. So he hired himself out to one of the local citizens
who sent him to his farm to tend the swine.
Have mercy on me, O God, in your goodness; And he longed to eat his fill of the pods on which the swine fed,
in the greatness of your compassion wipe out my offense. but nobody gave him any.
Thoroughly wash me from my guilt Coming to his senses he thought,
and of my sin cleanse me.—R. 'How many of my father's hired workers
have more than enough food to eat,
A clean heart create for me, O God, but here am I, dying from hunger.
and a steadfast spirit renew within me. I shall get up and go to my father and I shall say to him,
Cast me not out from your presence, "Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you.
and your holy spirit take not from me.—R. I no longer deserve to be called your son;
treat me as you would treat one of your hired workers."'
O Lord, open my lips, So he got up and went back to his father.
and my mouth shall proclaim your praise. While he was still a long way off,
My sacrifice, O God, is a contrite spirit; his father caught sight of him,
a heart contrite and humbled, O God, you will not spurn.—R. and was filled with compassion.
He ran to his son, embraced him and kissed him.
SECOND READING (1 Tim 1:12-17) His son said to him,
'Father, I have sinned against heaven and against you;
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy: I no longer deserve to be called your son.'
But his father ordered his servants,
BELOVED: 'Quickly bring the finest robe and put it on him;
I am grateful to him who has strengthened me, Christ Jesus our Lord, put a ring on his finger and sandals on his feet.
because he considered me trustworthy Take the fattened calf and slaughter it.
in appointing me to the ministry. Then let us celebrate with a feast,
I was once a blasphemer and a persecutor and arrogant, because this son of mine was dead, and has come to life again;
but I have been mercifully treated he was lost, and has been found.'
because I acted out of ignorance in my unbelief. Then the celebration began.
Indeed, the grace of our Lord has been abundant, Now the older son had been out in the field
along with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus. and, on his way back, as he neared the house,
This saying is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance: he heard the sound of music and dancing.
Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners. He called one of the servants and asked what this might mean.
Of these I am the foremost. The servant said to him,
But for that reason I was mercifully treated, 'Your brother has returned
so that in me, as the foremost, and your father has slaughtered the fattened calf
Christ Jesus might display all his patience as an example because he has him back safe and sound.'
for those who would come to believe in him for everlasting life. He became angry,
To the king of ages, incorruptible, invisible, the only God, and when he refused to enter the house,
honor and glory forever and ever. Amen. his father came out and pleaded with him.
He said to his father in reply,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. 'Look, all these years I served you
and not once did I disobey your orders;
ALLELUIA (2 Corinthians 5:19) yet you never gave me even a young goat to feast on with my friends.
But when your son returns,
R. Alleluia, alleluia. who swallowed up your property with prostitutes,
for him you slaughter the fattened calf.'
God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ He said to him,
and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation.—R. 'My son, you are here with me always;
everything I have is yours.
GOSPEL (Lk 15:1-32 or 15:1-10) But now we must celebrate and rejoice,
because your brother was dead and has come to life again;
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke: he was lost and has been found.'"
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 201 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS I was once a blasphemer and a persecutor and arrogant,
TWENTY-FOURTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C but I have been mercifully treated
because I acted out of ignorance in my unbelief.
Only shorter form of Gospel is given below. Indeed, the grace of our Lord has been abundant,
along with the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
This saying is trustworthy and deserves full acceptance:
FIRST READING (Ex 32:7-11, 13-14) Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners.
Of these I am the foremost.
A reading from the Book of Exodus: But for that reason I was mercifully treated,
so that in me, as the foremost,
THE LORD said to Moses, Christ Jesus might display all his patience as an example
"Go down at once to your people, for those who would come to believe in him for everlasting life.
whom you brought out of the land of Egypt, To the king of ages, incorruptible, invisible, the only God,
for they have become depraved. honor and glory forever and ever. Amen.
They have soon turned aside from the way I pointed out to them,
making for themselves a molten calf and worshiping it, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
sacrificing to it and crying out,
'This is your God, O Israel, ALLELUIA (2 Corinthians 5:19)
who brought you out of the land of Egypt!'
I see how stiff-necked this people is," continued the LORD to Moses. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
"Let me alone, then,
that my wrath may blaze up against them to consume them. God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ
Then I will make of you a great nation." and entrusting to us the message of reconciliation.—R.
But Moses implored the LORD, his God, saying, GOSPEL (Shorter form: Lk 15:1-10)
"Why, O LORD, should your wrath blaze up against your own
people, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
whom you brought out of the land of Egypt
with such great power and with so strong a hand? TAX collectors and sinners were all drawing near to listen to Jesus,
Remember your servants Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, but the Pharisees and scribes began to complain, saying,
and how you swore to them by your own self, saying, "This man welcomes sinners and eats with them."
'"I will make your descendants as numerous as the stars in the sky; So to them he addressed this parable.
and all this land that I promised, "What man among you having a hundred sheep and losing one of them
I will give your descendants as their perpetual heritage.'" would not leave the ninety-nine in the desert
So the LORD relented in the punishment and go after the lost one until he finds it?
he had threatened to inflict on his people. And when he does find it,
he sets it on his shoulders with great joy
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and, upon his arrival home,
he calls together his friends and neighbors and says to them,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 51:3-4, 12-13, 17, 19) 'Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep.'
I tell you, in just the same way
R. (Luke 15:18) I will rise and go to my father. there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents
than over ninety-nine righteous people
Have mercy on me, O God, in your goodness; who have no need of repentance.
in the greatness of your compassion wipe out my offense.
Thoroughly wash me from my guilt "Or what woman having ten coins and losing one
and of my sin cleanse me.—R. would not light a lamp and sweep the house,
searching carefully until she finds it?
A clean heart create for me, O God, And when she does find it,
and a steadfast spirit renew within me. she calls together her friends and neighbors
Cast me not out from your presence, and says to them,
and your holy spirit take not from me.—R. 'Rejoice with me because I have found the coin that I lost.'
In just the same way, I tell you,
O Lord, open my lips, there will be rejoicing among the angels of God
and my mouth shall proclaim your praise. over one sinner who repents."
My sacrifice, O God, is a contrite spirit;
a heart contrite and humbled, O God, you will not spurn.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
SECOND READING (1 Tim 1:12-17)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy:
BELOVED:
I am grateful to him who has strengthened me, Christ Jesus our Lord,
because he considered me trustworthy
in appointing me to the ministry.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 202 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS to listen to the words of your Son.—R.
TWENTY-FIFTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
GOSPEL (Mt 20:1-16a)
FIRST READING (Is 55:6-9) + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: JESUS told his disciples this parable:
"The kingdom of heaven is like a landowner
SEEK the LORD while he may be found, who went out at dawn to hire laborers for his vineyard.
call him while he is near. After agreeing with them for the usual daily wage,
Let the scoundrel forsake his way, he sent them into his vineyard.
and the wicked his thoughts; Going out about nine o'clock,
let him turn to the LORD for mercy; the landowner saw others standing idle in the marketplace,
to our God, who is generous in forgiving. and he said to them, 'You too go into my vineyard,
For my thoughts are not your thoughts, and I will give you what is just.'
nor are your ways my ways, says the LORD. So they went off.
As high as the heavens are above the earth, And he went out again around noon,
so high are my ways above your ways and around three o'clock, and did likewise.
and my thoughts above your thoughts. Going out about five o'clock,
the landowner found others standing around, and said to them,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. 'Why do you stand here idle all day?'
They answered, 'Because no one has hired us.'
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 145:2-3, 8-9, 17-18) He said to them, 'You too go into my vineyard.'
When it was evening the owner of the vineyard said to his foreman,
R. (18a) The Lord is near to all who call upon him. 'Summon the laborers and give them their pay,
beginning with the last and ending with the first.'
Every day will I bless you, When those who had started about five o'clock came,
and I will praise your name forever and ever. each received the usual daily wage.
Great is the Lord and highly to be praised; So when the first came, they thought that they would receive more,
his greatness is unsearchable.—R. but each of them also got the usual wage.
And on receiving it they grumbled against the landowner, saying,
The Lord is gracious and merciful, 'These last ones worked only one hour,
slow to anger and of great kindness. and you have made them equal to us,
The Lord is good to all who bore the day's burden and the heat.'
and compassionate toward all his works.—R. He said to one of them in reply,
'My friend, I am not cheating you.
The Lord is just in all his ways Did you not agree with me for the usual daily wage?
and holy in all his works. Take what is yours and go.
The Lord is near to all who call upon him, What if I wish to give this last one the same as you?
to all who call upon him in truth.—R. Or am I not free to do as I wish with my own money?
Are you envious because I am generous?'
SECOND READING (Phil 1:20c-24, 27a) Thus, the last will be first, and the first will be last."
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians: The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
BROTHERS and sisters:
Christ will be magnified in my body, whether by life or by death.
For to me life is Christ, and death is gain.
If I go on living in the flesh,
that means fruitful labor for me.
And I do not know which I shall choose.
I am caught between the two.
I long to depart this life and be with Christ,
for that is far better.
Yet that I remain in the flesh
is more necessary for your benefit.
Only, conduct yourselves in a way worthy of the gospel of Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (cf. Acts 16:14b)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Open our hearts, O Lord,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 203 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS because you ask wrongly, to spend it on your passions.
TWENTY-FIFTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Wis 2:12, 17-20) ALLELUIA (cf. 2 Thessalonians 2:14)
A reading from the Book of Wisdom: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
THE wicked say: God has called us through the Gospel
Let us beset the just one, because he is obnoxious to us; to possess the glory of our Lord Jesus Christ.—R.
he sets himself against our doings,
reproaches us for transgressions of the law GOSPEL (Mk 9:30-37)
and charges us with violations of our training.
Let us see whether his words be true; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
let us find out what will happen to him.
For if the just one be the son of God, God will defend him JESUS and his disciples left from there and began a journey
and deliver him from the hand of his foes. through Galilee,
With revilement and torture let us put the just one to the test but he did not wish anyone to know about it.
that we may have proof of his gentleness He was teaching his disciples and telling them,
and try his patience. "The Son of Man is to be handed over to men
Let us condemn him to a shameful death; and they will kill him,
for according to his own words, God will take care of him. and three days after his death the Son of Man will rise."
But they did not understand the saying,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and they were afraid to question him.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 54:3-4, 5, 6-8) They came to Capernaum and, once inside the house,
he began to ask them,
R. (6b) The Lord upholds my life. "What were you arguing about on the way?"
But they remained silent.
O God, by your name save me, They had been discussing among themselves on the way
and by your might defend my cause. who was the greatest.
O God, hear my prayer; Then he sat down, called the Twelve, and said to them,
hearken to the words of my mouth.—R. "If anyone wishes to be first,
he shall be the last of all and the servant of all."
For the haughty men have risen up against me, Taking a child, he placed it in the their midst,
the ruthless seek my life; and putting his arms around it, he said to them,
they set not God before their eyes.—R. "Whoever receives one child such as this in my name, receives me;
and whoever receives me,
Behold, God is my helper; receives not me but the One who sent me."
the Lord sustains my life.
Freely will I offer you sacrifice; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
I will praise your name, O Lord, for its goodness.—R.
SECOND READING (Jas 3:16-4:3)
A reading from the Letter of Saint James:
BELOVED:
Where jealousy and selfish ambition exist,
there is disorder and every foul practice.
But the wisdom from above is first of all pure,
then peaceable, gentle, compliant,
full of mercy and good fruits,
without inconstancy or insincerity.
And the fruit of righteousness is sown in peace
for those who cultivate peace.
Where do the wars
and where do the conflicts among you come from?
Is it not from your passions
that make war within your members?
You covet but do not possess.
You kill and envy but you cannot obtain;
you fight and wage war.
You do not possess because you do not ask.
You ask but do not receive,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 204 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS It is my wish, then, that in every place the men should pray,
TWENTY-FIFTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C lifting up holy hands, without anger or argument.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Am 8:4-7)
ALLELUIA (cf. 2 Corinthians 8:9)
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Amos:
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
HEAR this, you who trample upon the needy
and destroy the poor of the land! Though our Lord Jesus Christ was rich, he became poor,
"When will the new moon be over," you ask, so that by his poverty you might become rich.—R.
"that we may sell our grain,
and the sabbath, that we may display the wheat? GOSPEL (Lk 16:1-13 or 16:10-13)
We will diminish the ephah,
add to the shekel, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
and fix our scales for cheating!
We will buy the lowly for silver, [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
and the poor for a pair of sandals;
even the refuse of the wheat we will sell!" [ JESUS said to his disciples, ]
The LORD has sworn by the pride of Jacob: "A rich man had a steward
Never will I forget a thing they have done! who was reported to him for squandering his property.
He summoned him and said,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. 'What is this I hear about you?
Prepare a full account of your stewardship,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 113:1-2, 4-6, 7-8) because you can no longer be my steward.'
The steward said to himself, 'What shall I do,
R. (cf. 1a, 7b) Praise the Lord who lifts up the poor. now that my master is taking the position of steward away from me?
or: I am not strong enough to dig and I am ashamed to beg.
R. Alleluia. I know what I shall do so that,
when I am removed from the stewardship,
Praise, you servants of the Lord, they may welcome me into their homes.'
praise the name of the Lord. He called in his master's debtors one by one.
Blessed be the name of the Lord To the first he said,
both now and forever.—R. 'How much do you owe my master?'
He replied, 'One hundred measures of olive oil.'
High above all nations is the Lord; He said to him, 'Here is your promissory note.
above the heavens is his glory. Sit down and quickly write one for fifty.'
Who is like the Lord, our God, who is enthroned on high Then to another the steward said,' And you, how much do you owe?'
and looks upon the heavens and the earth below?—R. He replied, 'One hundred kors of wheat.'
The steward said to him, 'Here is your promissory note;
He raises up the lowly from the dust; write one for eighty.'
from the dunghill he lifts up the poor And the master commended that dishonest steward for acting prudently.
to seat them with princes, "For the children of this world
with the princes of his own people.—R. are more prudent in dealing with their own generation
than are the children of light.
SECOND READING (1 Tim 2:1-8) I tell you, make friends for yourselves with dishonest wealth,
so that when it fails, you will be welcomed into eternal dwellings.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy: [ The person who is trustworthy in very small matters
is also trustworthy in great ones;
BELOVED: and the person who is dishonest in very small matters
First of all, I ask that supplications, prayers, is also dishonest in great ones.
petitions, and thanksgivings be offered for everyone, If, therefore, you are not trustworthy with dishonest wealth,
for kings and for all in authority, who will trust you with true wealth?
that we may lead a quiet and tranquil life If you are not trustworthy with what belongs to another,
in all devotion and dignity. who will give you what is yours?
This is good and pleasing to God our savior, No servant can serve two masters.
who wills everyone to be saved He will either hate one and love the other,
and to come to knowledge of the truth. or be devoted to one and despise the other.
For there is one God. You cannot serve both God and mammon." ]
There is also one mediator between God and men,
the man Christ Jesus, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
who gave himself as ransom for all.
This was the testimony at the proper time.
For this I was appointed preacher and apostle
—I am speaking the truth, I am not lying—,
teacher of the Gentiles in faith and truth.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 205 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS something to be grasped.
TWENTY-SIXTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A Rather, he emptied himself,
taking the form of a slave,
coming in human likeness;
FIRST READING (Ez 18:25-28) and found human in appearance,
he humbled himself,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel: becoming obedient to the point of death,
even death on a cross.
THUS says the LORD: Because of this, God greatly exalted him
You say, "The LORD's way is not fair!" and bestowed on him the name
Hear now, house of Israel: which is above every name,
Is it my way that is unfair, or rather, are not your ways unfair? that at the name of Jesus
When someone virtuous turns away from virtue to commit iniquity, every knee should bend,
and dies, of those in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
it is because of the iniquity he committed that he must die. and every tongue confess that
But if he turns from the wickedness he has committed, Jesus Christ is Lord,
he does what is right and just, to the glory of God the Father.
he shall preserve his life;
since he has turned away from all the sins that The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
he has committed,
he shall surely live, he shall not die. ALLELUIA (John 10:27)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 25:4-5, 8-9, 10, 14) My sheep hear my voice, says the Lord;
I know them, and they follow me.—R.
R. (6a) Remember your mercies, O Lord.
GOSPEL (Mt 21:28-32)
Your ways, O LORD, make known to me;
teach me your paths, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
guide me in your truth and teach me,
for you are God my savior.—R. JESUS said to the chief priests and elders of the people:
"What is your opinion?
Remember that your compassion, O LORD, A man had two sons.
and your love are from of old. He came to the first and said,
The sins of my youth and my frailties remember not; 'Son, go out and work in the vineyard today.'
in your kindness remember me, He said in reply, 'I will not,'
because of your goodness, O LORD.—R. but afterwards changed his mind and went.
The man came to the other son and gave the same order.
Good and upright is the LORD; He said in reply, 'Yes, sir, but did not go.
thus he shows sinners the way. Which of the two did his father's will?"
He guides the humble to justice, They answered, "The first."
and teaches the humble his way.—R. Jesus said to them, "Amen, I say to you,
tax collectors and prostitutes
SECOND READING (Phil 2:1-11 or 2:1-5) are entering the kingdom of God before you.
When John came to you in the way of righteousness,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians: you did not believe him;
but tax collectors and prostitutes did.
[ Shorter form in brackets. ] Yet even when you saw that,
you did not later change your minds and believe him."
[ BROTHERS and sisters:
If there is any encouragement in Christ, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
any solace in love,
any participation in the Spirit,
any compassion and mercy,
complete my joy by being of the same mind, with the same love,
united in heart, thinking one thing.
Do nothing out of selfishness or out of vainglory;
rather, humbly regard others as more important than yourselves,
each looking out not for his own interests,
but also for those of others.
Have in you the same attitude
that is also in Christ Jesus, ]
Who, though he was in the form of God,
did not regard equality with God
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 206 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS have reached the ears of the Lord of hosts.
TWENTY-SIXTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B You have lived on earth in luxury and pleasure;
you have fattened your hearts for the day of slaughter.
You have condemned;
FIRST READING (Nm 11:25-29) you have murdered the righteous one;
he offers you no resistance.
A reading from the Book of Numbers:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
THE LORD came down in the cloud and spoke to Moses.
Taking some of the spirit that was on Moses, ALLELUIA (cf. John 17:17b, 17a)
the Lord bestowed it on the seventy elders;
and as the spirit came to rest on them, they prophesied. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Now two men, one named Eldad and the other Medad, Your word, O Lord, is truth;
were not in the gathering but had been left in the camp. consecrate us in the truth.—R.
They too had been on the list, but had not gone out to the tent;
yet the spirit came to rest on them also, GOSPEL (Mk 9:38-43, 45, 47-48)
and they prophesied in the camp.
So, when a young man quickly told Moses, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
"Eldad and Medad are prophesying in the camp,"
Joshua, son of Nun, who from his youth had been Moses' aide, said, AT that time, John said to Jesus,
"Moses, my lord, stop them." "Teacher, we saw someone driving out demons in your name,
But Moses answered him, and we tried to prevent him because he does not follow us."
"Are you jealous for my sake? Jesus replied, "Do not prevent him.
Would that all the people of the LORD were prophets! There is no one who performs a mighty deed in my name
Would that the LORD might bestow his spirit on them all!" who can at the same time speak ill of me.
For whoever is not against us is for us.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Anyone who gives you a cup of water to drink
because you belong to Christ,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 19:8, 10, 12-13, 14) amen, I say to you, will surely not lose his reward.
R. (9a) The precepts of the Lord give joy to the heart. "Whoever causes one of these little ones who believe in me to sin,
it would be better for him if a great millstone
The law of the LORD is perfect, were put around his neck
refreshing the soul; and he were thrown into the sea.
the decree of the LORD is trustworthy, If your hand causes you to sin, cut it off.
giving wisdom to the simple.—R. It is better for you to enter into life maimed
than with two hands to go into Gehenna,
The fear of the LORD is pure, into the unquenchable fire.
enduring forever; And if your foot causes you to sin, cut if off.
the ordinances of the LORD are true, It is better for you to enter into life crippled
all of them just.—R. than with two feet to be thrown into Gehenna.
And if your eye causes you to sin, pluck it out.
Though your servant is careful of them, Better for you to enter into the kingdom of God with one eye
very diligent in keeping them, than with two eyes to be thrown into Gehenna,
Yet who can detect failings? where 'their worm does not die, and the fire is not quenched.'"
Cleanse me from my unknown faults!—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
From wanton sin especially, restrain your servant;
let it not rule over me.
Then shall I be blameless and innocent
of serious sin.—R.
SECOND READING (Jas 5:1-6)
A reading from the Letter of Saint James:
COME now, you rich, weep and wail over your impending miseries.
Your wealth has rotted away, your clothes have become moth-eaten,
your gold and silver have corroded,
and that corrosion will be a testimony against you;
it will devour your flesh like a fire.
You have stored up treasure for the last days.
Behold, the wages you withheld from the workers
who harvested your fields are crying aloud;
and the cries of the harvesters
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 207 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (cf. 2 Corinthians 8:9)
TWENTY-SIXTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Am 6:1a, 4-7) Though our Lord Jesus Christ was rich, he became poor,
so that by his poverty you might become rich.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Amos:
GOSPEL (Lk 16:19-31)
THUS says the Lord the God of hosts:
Woe to the complacent in Zion! + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
Lying upon beds of ivory,
stretched comfortably on their couches, JESUS said to the Pharisees:
they eat lambs taken from the flock, "There was a rich man who dressed in purple garments and fine linen
and calves from the stall! and dined sumptuously each day.
Improvising to the music of the harp, And lying at his door was a poor man named Lazarus, covered with sores,
like David, they devise their own accompaniment. who would gladly have eaten his fill of the scraps
They drink wine from bowls that fell from the rich man's table.
and anoint themselves with the best oils; Dogs even used to come and lick his sores.
yet they are not made ill by the collapse of Joseph! When the poor man died,
Therefore, now they shall be the first to go into exile, he was carried away by angels to the bosom of Abraham.
and their wanton revelry shall be done away with. The rich man also died and was buried,
and from the netherworld, where he was in torment,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. he raised his eyes and saw Abraham far off
and Lazarus at his side.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 146:7, 8-9, 9-10) And he cried out, 'Father Abraham, have pity on me.
Send Lazarus to dip the tip of his finger in water and cool my tongue,
R. (1b) Praise the Lord, my soul!
for I am suffering torment in these flames.'
or:
Abraham replied,
Alleluia.
'My child, remember that you received
what was good during your lifetime
Blessed he who keeps faith forever,
while Lazarus likewise received what was bad;
secures justice for the oppressed,
but now he is comforted here, whereas you are tormented.
gives food to the hungry.
Moreover, between us and you a great chasm is established
The LORD sets captives free.—R.
to prevent anyone from crossing who might wish to go
from our side to yours or from your side to ours.'
The LORD gives sight to the blind.
He said, 'Then I beg you, father,
The LORD raises up those who were bowed down.
send him to my father's house, for I have five brothers,
The LORD loves the just.
so that he may warn them,
the LORD protects strangers.—R.
lest they too come to this place of torment.'
But Abraham replied, 'They have Moses and the prophets.
The fatherless and the widow he sustains,
Let them listen to them.'
but the way of the wicked he thwarts.
The LORD shall reign forever; He said, 'Oh no, father Abraham,
your God, O Zion, through all generations. Alleluia.—R. but if someone from the dead goes to them, they will repent.'
Then Abraham said, 'If they will not listen to Moses and the prophets,
SECOND READING (1 Tm 6:11-16) neither will they be persuaded if someone should rise from the dead.'"
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy: The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
BUT you, man of God, pursue righteousness,
devotion, faith, love, patience, and gentleness.
Compete well for the faith.
Lay hold of eternal life, to which you were called
when you made the noble confession in the presence of
many witnesses.
I charge you before God, who gives life to all things,
and before Christ Jesus,
who gave testimony under Pontius Pilate for the noble confession,
to keep the commandment without stain or reproach
until the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ
that the blessed and only ruler
will make manifest at the proper time,
the King of kings and Lord of lords,
who alone has immortality, who dwells in unapproachable light,
and whom no human being has seen or can see.
To him be honor and eternal power. Amen.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 208 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (Phil 4:6-9)
TWENTY-SEVENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians:
FIRST READING (Is 5:1-7) BROTHERS and sisters:
Have no anxiety at all, but in everything,
by prayer and petition, with thanksgiving,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
make your requests known to God.
Then the peace of God that surpasses all understanding
LET me now sing of my friend,
will guard your hearts and minds in Christ Jesus.
my friend's song concerning his vineyard.
My friend had a vineyard
Finally, brothers and sisters,
on a fertile hillside;
whatever is true, whatever is honorable,
he spaded it, cleared it of stones,
whatever is just, whatever is pure,
and planted the choicest vines;
whatever is lovely, whatever is gracious,
within it he built a watchtower,
if there is any excellence
and hewed out a wine press.
and if there is anything worthy of praise,
Then he looked for the crop of grapes,
think about these things.
but what it yielded was wild grapes.
Keep on doing what you have learned and received
and heard and seen in me.
Now, inhabitants of Jerusalem and people of Judah,
Then the God of peace will be with you.
judge between me and my vineyard:
What more was there to do for my vineyard The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
that I had not done?
Why, when I looked for the crop of grapes, ALLELUIA (cf. John 15:16)
did it bring forth wild grapes?
Now, I will let you know R. Alleluia, alleluia.
what I mean to do with my vineyard:
take away its hedge, give it to grazing, I have chosen you from the world, says the Lord,
break through its wall, let it be trampled! to go and bear fruit that will remain.—R.
Yes, I will make it a ruin:
it shall not be pruned or hoed, GOSPEL (Mt 21:33-43)
but overgrown with thorns and briers;
I will command the clouds + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
not to send rain upon it.
The vineyard of the LORD of hosts is the house of Israel, JESUS said to the chief priests and the elders of the people:
and the people of Judah are his cherished plant; "Hear another parable.
he looked for judgment, but see, bloodshed! There was a landowner who planted a vineyard,
for justice, but hark, the outcry! put a hedge around it, dug a wine press in it, and built a tower.
Then he leased it to tenants and went on a journey.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. When vintage time drew near,
he sent his servants to the tenants to obtain his produce.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 80:9, 12, 13-14, 15-16, 19-20) But the tenants seized the servants and one they beat,
another they killed, and a third they stoned.
R. (Is 5:7a) The vineyard of the Lord is the house of Israel. Again he sent other servants, more numerous than the first ones,
but they treated them in the same way.
A vine from Egypt you transplanted; Finally, he sent his son to them, thinking,
'They will respect my son.'
you drove away the nations and planted it.
But when the tenants saw the son, they said to one another,
It put forth its foliage to the Sea,
'This is the heir.
its shoots as far as the River.—R.
Come, let us kill him and acquire his inheritance.=
They seized him, threw him out of the vineyard, and killed him.
Why have you broken down its walls,
What will the owner of the vineyard do to those tenants when he comes?"
so that every passer-by plucks its fruit,
They answered him,
The boar from the forest lays it waste,
"He will put those wretched men to a wretched death
and the beasts of the field feed upon it?—R.
and lease his vineyard to other tenants
who will give him the produce at the proper times."
Once again, O LORD of hosts,
Jesus said to them, "Did you never read in the Scriptures:
look down from heaven, and see;
The stone that the builders rejected
take care of this vine,
has become the cornerstone;
and protect what your right hand has planted
by the Lord has this been done,
the son of man whom you yourself made strong.—R.
and it is wonderful in our eyes?
Therefore, I say to you,
Then we will no more withdraw from you;
the kingdom of God will be taken away from you
give us new life, and we will call upon your name. and given to a people that will produce its fruit."
O LORD, God of hosts, restore us;
if your face shine upon us, then we shall be saved.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 209 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS for whom and through whom all things exist,
TWENTY-SEVENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B in bringing many children to glory,
should make the leader to their salvation perfect through suffering.
He who consecrates and those who are being consecrated
FIRST READING (Gn 2:18-24) all have one origin.
Therefore, he is not ashamed to call them “brothers.”
A reading from the Book of Genesis:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
THE LORD God said: "It is not good for the man to be alone.
I will make a suitable partner for him." ALLELUIA (1 John 4:12)
So the LORD God formed out of the ground
various wild animals and various birds of the air, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and he brought them to the man to see what he would call them;
whatever the man called each of them would be its name. If we love one another, God remains in us
The man gave names to all the cattle, and his love is brought to perfection in us.—R.
all the birds of the air, and all wild animals;
but none proved to be the suitable partner for the man. GOSPEL (Mk 10:2-16 or 10:2-12)
So the LORD God cast a deep sleep on the man, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
and while he was asleep,
he took out one of his ribs and closed up its place with flesh. [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
The LORD God then built up into a woman the rib
that he had taken from the man. [ THE Pharisees approached Jesus and asked,
When he brought her to the man, the man said: "Is it lawful for a husband to divorce his wife?"
"This one, at last, is bone of my bones They were testing him.
and flesh of my flesh; He said to them in reply, "What did Moses command you?"
this one shall be called 'woman, ' They replied,
for out of 'her man’ this one has been taken." "Moses permitted a husband to write a bill of divorce
That is why a man leaves his father and mother and dismiss her."
and clings to his wife, But Jesus told them,
and the two of them become one flesh. "Because of the hardness of your hearts he wrote you
this commandment.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. But from the beginning of creation, God made them male and female.
For this reason a man shall leave his father and mother
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 128:1-2, 3, 4-5, 6) and be joined to his wife,
and the two shall become one flesh.
R. (cf. 5) May the Lord bless us all the days of our lives. So they are no longer two but one flesh.
Therefore what God has joined together,
Blessed are you who fear the LORD, no human being must separate."
who walk in his ways! In the house the disciples again questioned Jesus about this.
For you shall eat the fruit of your handiwork; He said to them,
blessed shall you be, and favored.—R. "Whoever divorces his wife and marries another
commits adultery against her;
Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine and if she divorces her husband and marries another,
in the recesses of your home; she commits adultery." ]
your children like olive plants
around your table.—R. And people were bringing children to him that he might touch them,
but the disciples rebuked them.
Behold, thus is the man blessed When Jesus saw this he became indignant and said to them,
who fears the LORD. "Let the children come to me;
The LORD bless you from Zion: do not prevent them, for the kingdom of God belongs to
may you see the prosperity of Jerusalem such as these.
all the days of your life.—R. Amen, I say to you,
whoever does not accept the kingdom of God like a child
May you see your children's children. will not enter it."
Peace be upon Israel!—R. Then he embraced them and blessed them,
placing his hands on them.
SECOND READING (Heb 2:9-11)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
BROTHERS and sisters:
He "for a little while" was made "lower than the angels, "
that by the grace of God he might taste death for everyone.
For it was fitting that he,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 210 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (1 Peter 1:25)
TWENTY-SEVENTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Heb 1:2-3; 2:2-4) The word of the Lord remains for ever.
This is the word that has been proclaimed to you.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Habakkuk:
GOSPEL (Lk 17:5-10)
HOW long, O LORD? I cry for help
but you do not listen! + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
I cry out to you, "Violence!"
but you do not intervene. THE apostles said to the Lord, "Increase our faith."
Why do you let me see ruin; The Lord replied,
why must I look at misery? "If you have faith the size of a mustard seed,
Destruction and violence are before me; you would say to this mulberry tree,
there is strife, and clamorous discord. 'Be uprooted and planted in the sea,' and it would obey you.
Then the LORD answered me and said:
Write down the vision clearly upon the tablets, "Who among you would say to your servant
so that one can read it readily. who has just come in from plowing or tending sheep in the field,
For the vision still has its time, 'Come here immediately and take your place at table'?
presses on to fulfillment, and will not disappoint; Would he not rather say to him,
if it delays, wait for it, 'Prepare something for me to eat.
it will surely come, it will not be late. Put on your apron and wait on me while I eat and drink.
The rash one has no integrity; You may eat and drink when I am finished'?
but the just one, because of his faith, shall live. Is he grateful to that servant because he did what was commanded?
So should it be with you.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
When you have done all you have been commanded,
say, 'We are unprofitable servants;
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 95:1-2, 6-7, 8-9)
we have done what we were obliged to do.'"
R. (8) If today you hear his voice, harden not your hearts.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Come, let us sing joyfully to the LORD;
let us acclaim the Rock of our salvation.
Let us come into his presence with thanksgiving;
let us joyfully sing psalms to him.—R.
Come, let us bow down in worship;
let us kneel before the LORD who made us.
For he is our God,
and we are the people he shepherds, the flock he guides.—R.
Oh, that today you would hear his voice:
"Harden not your hearts as at Meribah,
as in the day of Massah in the desert,
Where your fathers tempted me;
they tested me though they had seen my works."—R.
SECOND READING (2 Tm 1:6-8, 13-14)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy:
BELOVED:
I remind you, to stir into flame
the gift of God that you have through the imposition of my hands.
For God did not give us a spirit of cowardice
but rather of power and love and self-control.
So do not be ashamed of your testimony to our Lord,
nor of me, a prisoner for his sake;
but bear your share of hardship for the gospel
with the strength that comes from God.
Take as your norm the sound words that you heard from me,
in the faith and love that are in Christ Jesus.
Guard this rich trust with the help of the Holy Spirit
that dwells within us.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 211 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS My God will fully supply whatever you need,
TWENTY-EIGHTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A in accord with his glorious riches in Christ Jesus.
To our God and Father, glory forever and ever. Amen.
FIRST READING (Is 25:6-10a) The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: ALLELUIA (cf. Ephesians 1:17-18)
ON this mountain the LORD of hosts R. Alleluia, alleluia.
will provide for all peoples
a feast of rich food and choice wines, May the Father of Our Lord Jesus Christ
juicy, rich food and pure, choice wines. enlighten the eyes of our hearts, so
On this mountain he will destroy that we may know what is the hope
the veil that veils all peoples, that belongs to our call.—R.
the web that is woven over all nations;
he will destroy death forever. GOSPEL (Mt 22:1-14 or 22:1-10)
The Lord GOD will wipe away
the tears from every face; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
the reproach of his people he will remove
from the whole earth; for the LORD has spoken. [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
On that day it will be said:
"Behold our God, to whom we looked to save us! [ JESUS again in reply spoke to the chief priests and elders of the people
This is the LORD for whom we looked; in parables, saying,
let us rejoice and be glad that he has saved us!" "The kingdom of heaven may be likened to a king
For the hand of the LORD will rest on this mountain. who gave a wedding feast for his son.
He dispatched his servants
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. to summon the invited guests to the feast,
but they refused to come.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 23:1-3a, 3b-4, 5, 6) A second time he sent other servants, saying,
'Tell those invited: "Behold, I have prepared my banquet,
R. (6cd) I shall live in the house of the Lord all the days of my life. my calves and fattened cattle are killed,
and everything is ready; come to the feast."'
The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want. Some ignored the invitation and went away,
In verdant pastures he gives me repose; one to his farm, another to his business.
beside restful waters he leads me; The rest laid hold of his servants,
he refreshes my soul.—R. mistreated them, and killed them.
The king was enraged and sent his troops,
He guides me in right paths destroyed those murderers, and burned their city.
for his name's sake. Then he said to his servants, 'The feast is ready,
Even though I walk in the dark valley but those who were invited were not worthy to come.
I fear no evil; for you are at my side Go out, therefore, into the main roads
with your rod and your staff and invite to the feast whomever you find.'
that give me courage.—R. The servants went out into the streets
and gathered all they found, bad and good alike,
You spread the table before me and the hall was filled with guests. ]
in the sight of my foes; But when the king came in to meet the guests,
you anoint my head with oil; he saw a man there not dressed in a wedding garment.
my cup overflows.—R. The king said to him, 'My friend, how is it
that you came in here without a wedding garment?'
Only goodness and kindness follow me But he was reduced to silence.
all the days of my life; Then the king said to his attendants, 'Bind his hands and feet,
and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD and cast him into the darkness outside,
for years to come.—R. where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.'
Many are invited, but few are chosen."
SECOND READING (Phil 4:12-14, 19-20)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
I know how to live in humble circumstances;
I know also how to live with abundance.
In every circumstance and in all things
I have learned the secret of being well fed and of going hungry,
of living in abundance and of being in need.
I can do all things in him who strengthens me.
Still, it was kind of you to share in my distress.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 212 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Mk 10:17-30 or 10:17-27)
TWENTY-EIGHTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
FIRST READING (Wis 7:7-11) [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
A reading from the Book of Wisdom: [ AS Jesus was setting out on a journey, a man ran up,
knelt down before him, and asked him,
I PRAYED, and prudence was given me; "Good teacher, what must I do to inherit eternal life?"
I pleaded, and the spirit of wisdom came to me. Jesus answered him, "Why do you call me good?
I preferred her to scepter and throne, No one is good but God alone.
and deemed riches nothing in comparison with her, You know the commandments: You shall not kill;
nor did I liken any priceless gem to her; you shall not commit adultery;
because all gold, in view of her, is a little sand, you shall not steal;
and before her, silver is to be accounted mire. you shall not bear false witness;
Beyond health and comeliness I loved her, you shall not defraud;
and I chose to have her rather than the light, honor your father and your mother."
because the splendor of her never yields to sleep. He replied and said to him,
Yet all good things together came to me in her company, "Teacher, all of these I have observed from my youth."
and countless riches at her hands. Jesus, looking at him, loved him and said to him,
"You are lacking in one thing.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Go, sell what you have, and give to the poor
and you will have treasure in heaven; then come, follow me."
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 90:12-13, 14-15, 16-17) At that statement his face fell,
and he went away sad, for he had many possessions.
R. (14) Fill us with your love, O Lord, and we will sing for joy!
Jesus looked around and said to his disciples,
Teach us to number our days aright, "How hard it is for those who have wealth
that we may gain wisdom of heart. to enter the kingdom of God!"
Return, O LORD! How long? The disciples were amazed at his words.
Have pity on your servants!—R. So Jesus again said to them in reply,
"Children, how hard it is to enter the kingdom of God!
Fill us at daybreak with your kindness, It is easier for a camel to pass through the eye of a needle
that we may shout for joy and gladness all our days. than for one who is rich to enter the kingdom of God."
Make us glad, for the days when you afflicted us, They were exceedingly astonished and said among themselves,
for the years when we saw evil.—R. "Then who can be saved?"
Jesus looked at them and said,
Let your work be seen by your servants "For human beings it is impossible, but not for God.
and your glory by their children; All things are possible for God." ]
and may the gracious care of the Lord our God be ours; Peter began to say to him,
prosper the work of our hands for us! "We have given up everything and followed you."
Prosper the work of our hands!—R. Jesus said, "Amen, I say to you,
there is no one who has given up house or brothers or sisters
SECOND READING (Heb 4:12-13) or mother or father or children or lands
for my sake and for the sake of the gospel
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews: who will not receive a hundred times more now in this present age:
houses and brothers and sisters
BROTHERS and sisters: and mothers and children and lands,
Indeed the word of God is living and effective, with persecutions, and eternal life in the age to come."
sharper than any two-edged sword,
penetrating even between soul and spirit, joints and marrow, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and able to discern reflections and thoughts of the heart.
No creature is concealed from him,
but everything is naked and exposed to the eyes of him
to whom we must render an account.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Matthew 5:3)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Blessed are the poor in spirit,
for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 213 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS If we are unfaithful
TWENTY-EIGHTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C he remains faithful,
for he cannot deny himself.
FIRST READING (2 Kgs 5:14-17) The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the second Book of Kings: ALLELUIA (1 Thessalonians 5:18)
NAAMAN went down and plunged into the Jordan seven times R. Alleluia, alleluia.
at the word of Elisha, the man of God.
His flesh became again like the flesh of a little child, In all circumstances, give thanks,
and he was clean of his leprosy. for this is the will of God for you in Christ Jesus.—R.
Naaman returned with his whole retinue to the man of God. GOSPEL (Lk 17:11-19)
On his arrival he stood before Elisha and said,
"Now I know that there is no God in all the earth, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
except in Israel.
Please accept a gift from your servant." AS Jesus continued his journey to Jerusalem,
he traveled through Samaria and Galilee.
Elisha replied, "As the LORD lives whom I serve, I will not take it;" As he was entering a village, ten lepers met him.
and despite Naaman's urging, he still refused. They stood at a distance from him and raised their voices, saying,
Naaman said: "If you will not accept, "Jesus, Master! Have pity on us!"
please let me, your servant, have two mule-loads of earth, And when he saw them, he said,
for I will no longer offer holocaust or sacrifice "Go show yourselves to the priests."
to any other god except to the LORD." As they were going they were cleansed.
And one of them, realizing he had been healed,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. returned, glorifying God in a loud voice;
and he fell at the feet of Jesus and thanked him.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 98:1, 2-3, 3-4) He was a Samaritan.
Jesus said in reply,
R. (cf. 2b) The Lord has revealed to the nations his saving power. "Ten were cleansed, were they not?
Where are the other nine?
Sing to the LORD a new song, Has none but this foreigner returned to give thanks to God?"
for he has done wondrous deeds; Then he said to him, "Stand up and go;
his right hand has won victory for him, your faith has saved you."
his holy arm.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The LORD has made his salvation known:
in the sight of the nations he has revealed his justice.
He has remembered his kindness and his faithfulness
toward the house of Israel.—R.
All the ends of the earth have seen
the salvation by our God.
Sing joyfully to the LORD, all you lands:
break into song; sing praise.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Tm 2:8-13)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy:
BELOVED:
Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, a descendant of David:
such is my gospel, for which I am suffering,
even to the point of chains, like a criminal.
But the word of God is not chained.
Therefore, I bear with everything for the sake of those who are chosen,
so that they too may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus,
together with eternal glory.
This saying is trustworthy:
If we have died with him
we shall also live with him;
if we persevere
we shall also reign with him.
But if we deny him
he will deny us.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 214 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS but also in power and in the Holy Spirit and with much conviction.
TWENTY-NINTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Is 45:1, 4-6) ALLELUIA (Phil 2:15d, 16a)
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
THUS says the LORD to his anointed, Cyrus, Shine like lights in the world
whose right hand I grasp, as you hold on to the word of life.—R.
subduing nations before him,
and making kings run in his service, GOSPEL (Mt 22:15-21)
opening doors before him
and leaving the gates unbarred: + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
For the sake of Jacob, my servant,
of Israel, my chosen one, THE Pharisees went off
I have called you by your name, and plotted how they might entrap Jesus in speech.
giving you a title, though you knew me not. They sent their disciples to him, with the Herodians, saying,
I am the LORD and there is no other, "Teacher, we know that you are a truthful man
there is no God besides me. and that you teach the way of God in accordance with the truth.
It is I who arm you, though you know me not, And you are not concerned with anyone's opinion,
so that toward the rising and the setting of the sun for you do not regard a person's status.
people may know that there is none besides me. Tell us, then, what is your opinion:
I am the LORD, there is no other. Is it lawful to pay the census tax to Caesar or not?"
Knowing their malice, Jesus said,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. "Why are you testing me, you hypocrites?
Show me the coin that pays the census tax."
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 96:1, 3, 4-5, 7-8, 9-10) Then they handed him the Roman coin.
He said to them, "Whose image is this and whose inscription?"
R. (7b) Give the Lord glory and honor. They replied, "Caesar's."
At that he said to them,
Sing to the LORD a new song; "Then repay to Caesar what belongs to Caesar
sing to the LORD, all you lands. and to God what belongs to God."
Tell his glory among the nations;
among all peoples, his wondrous deeds.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
For great is the LORD and highly to be praised;
awesome is he, beyond all gods.
For all the gods of the nations are things of nought,
but the LORD made the heavens.—R.
Give to the LORD, you families of nations,
give to the LORD glory and praise;
give to the LORD the glory due his name!
Bring gifts, and enter his courts.—R.
Worship the LORD, in holy attire;
tremble before him, all the earth.
Say among the nations: The LORD is king,
he governs the peoples with equity.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Thes 1:1-5b)
The beginning of the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians:
PAUL, Silvanus, and Timothy to the church of the Thessalonians
in God the Father and the Lord Jesus Christ:
grace to you and peace.
We give thanks to God always for all of you,
remembering you in our prayers,
unceasingly calling to mind your work of faith and labor of love
and endurance in hope of our Lord Jesus Christ,
before our God and Father,
knowing, brothers and sisters loved by God,
how you were chosen.
For our gospel did not come to you in word alone,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 215 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Mk 10:35-45 or 10:42-45)
TWENTY-NINTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
FIRST READING (Is 53:10-11) [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: JAMES and John, the sons of Zebedee, came to Jesus and said to him,
"Teacher, we want you to do for us whatever we ask of you."
THE LORD was pleased He replied, "What do you wish me to do for you?"
to crush him in infirmity. They answered him, "Grant that in your glory
we may sit one at your right and the other at your left."
If he gives his life as an offering for sin, Jesus said to them, "You do not know what you are asking.
he shall see his descendants in a long life, Can you drink the cup that I drink
and the will of the LORD shall be accomplished through him. or be baptized with the baptism with which I am baptized?"
They said to him, "We can."
Because of his affliction Jesus said to them, "The cup that I drink, you will drink,
he shall see the light in fullness of days; and with the baptism with which I am baptized, you will be baptized;
through his suffering, my servant shall justify many, but to sit at my right or at my left is not mine to give
and their guilt he shall bear. but is for those for whom it has been prepared."
When the ten heard this, they became indignant at James and John.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. [ Jesus summoned them and said to them,
"You know that those who are recognized as rulers over the Gentiles
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 33:4-5, 18-19, 20, 22) lord it over them,
and their great ones make their authority over them felt.
R. (22) Lord, let your mercy be on us, as we place our trust in you. But it shall not be so among you.
Rather, whoever wishes to be great among you will be your servant;
Upright is the word of the LORD, whoever wishes to be first among you will be the slave of all.
and all his works are trustworthy. For the Son of Man did not come to be served
He loves justice and right; but to serve and to give his life as a ransom for many." ]
of the kindness of the LORD the earth is full.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
See, the eyes of the LORD are upon those who fear him,
upon those who hope for his kindness,
To deliver them from death
and preserve them in spite of famine.—R.
Our soul waits for the LORD,
who is our help and our shield.
May your kindness, O LORD, be upon us
who have put our hope in you.—R.
SECOND READING (Heb 4:14-16)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Since we have a great high priest who has passed through the heavens,
Jesus, the Son of God,
let us hold fast to our confession.
For we do not have a high priest
who is unable to sympathize with our weaknesses,
but one who has similarly been tested in every way,
yet without sin.
So let us confidently approach the throne of grace
to receive mercy and to find grace for timely help.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Mark 10:45)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
The Son of Man came to serve
and to give his life as a ransom for many.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 216 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and is useful for teaching, for refutation, for correction,
TWENTY-NINTH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C and for training in righteousness,
so that one who belongs to God may be competent,
equipped for every good work.
FIRST READING (Ex 17:8-13)
I charge you in the presence of God and of Christ Jesus,
A reading from the Book of Exodus: who will judge the living and the dead,
and by his appearing and his kingly power:
IN those days, Amalek came and waged war against Israel. proclaim the word;
Moses, therefore, said to Joshua, be persistent whether it is convenient or inconvenient;
"Pick out certain men, convince, reprimand, encourage through all patience and teaching.
and tomorrow go out and engage Amalek in battle.
I will be standing on top of the hill The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
with the staff of God in my hand."
So Joshua did as Moses told him: ALLELUIA (Hebrews 4:12)
he engaged Amalek in battle
after Moses had climbed to the top of the hill with Aaron and Hur. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
As long as Moses kept his hands raised up,
Israel had the better of the fight, The word of God is living and effective,
but when he let his hands rest, discerning reflections and thoughts of the heart.—R.
Amalek had the better of the fight.
Moses' hands, however, grew tired; GOSPEL (Lk 18:1-8)
so they put a rock in place for him to sit on.
Meanwhile Aaron and Hur supported his hands, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
one on one side and one on the other,
so that his hands remained steady till sunset. JESUS told his disciples a parable
And Joshua mowed down Amalek and his people about the necessity for them to pray always without becoming weary.
with the edge of the sword. He said, "There was a judge in a certain town
who neither feared God nor respected any human being.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. And a widow in that town used to come to him and say,
'Render a just decision for me against my adversary.'
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 121:1-2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8) For a long time the judge was unwilling, but eventually he thought,
'While it is true that I neither fear God nor respect any human being,
R. (cf. 2) Our help is from the Lord, who made heaven and earth. because this widow keeps bothering me
I shall deliver a just decision for her
I lift up my eyes toward the mountains; lest she finally come and strike me.'"
whence shall help come to me? The Lord said, "Pay attention to what the dishonest judge says.
My help is from the LORD, Will not God then secure the rights of his chosen ones
who made heaven and earth.—R. who call out to him day and night?
Will he be slow to answer them?
May he not suffer your foot to slip; I tell you, he will see to it that justice is done for them speedily.
may he slumber not who guards you: But when the Son of Man comes, will he find faith on earth?"
indeed he neither slumbers nor sleeps,
the guardian of Israel.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The LORD is your guardian; the LORD is your shade;
he is beside you at your right hand.
The sun shall not harm you by day,
nor the moon by night.—R.
The LORD will guard you from all evil;
he will guard your life.
The LORD will guard your coming and your going,
both now and forever.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Tm 3:14-4:2)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy:
BELOVED:
Remain faithful to what you have learned and believed,
because you know from whom you learned it,
and that from infancy you have known the sacred Scriptures,
which are capable of giving you wisdom for salvation
through faith in Christ Jesus.
All Scripture is inspired by God
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 217 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Jesus, who delivers us from the coming wrath.
THIRTIETH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Ex 22:20-26) ALLELUIA (John 14:23)
A reading from the Book of Exodus: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
THUS says the Lord: Whoever loves me, will keep my word,
"You shall not molest or oppress an alien, and my Father will love him and we will come to him.—R.
for you were once aliens yourselves in the land of Egypt.
You shall not wrong any widow or orphan. GOSPEL (Mt 22:34-40)
If ever you wrong them and they cry out to me,
I will surely hear their cry. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
My wrath will flare up, and I will kill you with the sword;
then your own wives will be widows, and your children orphans. WHEN the Pharisees heard that Jesus had silenced the Sadducees,
they gathered together, and one of them,
"If you lend money to one of your poor neighbors among my people, a scholar of the law tested him by asking,
you shall not act like an extortioner toward him "Teacher, which commandment in the law is the greatest?"
by demanding interest from him. He said to him,
If you take your neighbor's cloak as a pledge, "You shall love the Lord, your God,
you shall return it to him before sunset; with all your heart,
for this cloak of his is the only covering he has for his body. with all your soul,
What else has he to sleep in? and with all your mind.
If he cries out to me, I will hear him; for I am compassionate." This is the greatest and the first commandment.
The second is like it:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. You shall love your neighbor as yourself.
The whole law and the prophets depend on these two commandments."
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 18:2-3, 3-4, 47, 51)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
R. (2) I love you, Lord, my strength.
I love you, O LORD, my strength,
O LORD, my rock, my fortress, my deliverer.—R.
My God, my rock of refuge,
my shield, the horn of my salvation, my stronghold!
Praised be the LORD, I exclaim,
and I am safe from my enemies.—R.
The LORD lives and blessed be my rock!
Extolled be God my savior.
You who gave great victories to your king
and showed kindness to your anointed.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Thes 1:5c-10)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
You know what sort of people we were among you for your sake.
And you became imitators of us and of the Lord,
receiving the word in great affliction, with joy from
the Holy Spirit,
so that you became a model for all the believers
in Macedonia and in Achaia.
For from you the word of the Lord has sounded forth
not only in Macedonia and in Achaia,
but in every place your faith in God has gone forth,
so that we have no need to say anything.
For they themselves openly declare about us
what sort of reception we had among you,
and how you turned to God from idols
to serve the living and true God
and to await his Son from heaven,
whom he raised from the dead,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 218 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS but only when called by God,
THIRTIETH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B just as Aaron was.
In the same way,
it was not Christ who glorified himself in becoming high priest,
FIRST READING (Jer 31:7-9) but rather the one who said to him:
You are my son:
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah: this day I have begotten you;
just as he says in another place:
THUS says the LORD: You are a priest forever
Shout with joy for Jacob, according to the order of Melchizedek.
exult at the head of the nations;
proclaim your praise and say: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
The LORD has delivered his people,
the remnant of Israel. ALLELUIA (cf. 2 Timothy 1:10)
Behold, I will bring them back
from the land of the north; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
I will gather them from the ends of the world,
with the blind and the lame in their midst, Our Savior Jesus Christ destroyed death
the mothers and those with child; and brought life to light through the Gospel.—R.
they shall return as an immense throng.
They departed in tears, GOSPEL (Mk 10:46-52)
but I will console them and guide them;
I will lead them to brooks of water, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
on a level road, so that none shall stumble.
For I am a father to Israel, AS Jesus was leaving Jericho with his disciples and a sizable crowd,
Ephraim is my first-born. Bartimaeus, a blind man, the son of Timaeus,
sat by the roadside begging.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. On hearing that it was Jesus of Nazareth,
he began to cry out and say,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 126:1-2, 2-3, 4-5, 6) "Jesus, son of David, have pity on me."
And many rebuked him, telling him to be silent.
R. (3) The Lord has done great things for us; we are filled with joy. But he kept calling out all the more,
"Son of David, have pity on me."
When the LORD brought back the captives of Zion, Jesus stopped and said, "Call him."
we were like men dreaming. So they called the blind man, saying to him,
Then our mouth was filled with laughter, "Take courage; get up, Jesus is calling you."
and our tongue with rejoicing.—R. He threw aside his cloak, sprang up,
and came to Jesus.
Then they said among the nations, Jesus said to him in reply, "What do you want me to do for you?"
"The LORD has done great things for them." The blind man replied to him, "Master, I want to see."
The LORD has done great things for us; Jesus told him, "Go your way; your faith has saved you."
we are glad indeed.—R. Immediately he received his sight
and followed him on the way.
Restore our fortunes, O LORD,
like the torrents in the southern desert. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Those that sow in tears
shall reap rejoicing.—R.
Although they go forth weeping,
carrying the seed to be sown,
They shall come back rejoicing,
carrying their sheaves.—R.
SECOND READING (Heb 5:1-6)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Every high priest is taken from among men
and made their representative before God,
to offer gifts and sacrifices for sins.
He is able to deal patiently with the ignorant and erring,
for he himself is beset by weakness
and so, for this reason, must make sin offerings for himself
as well as for the people.
No one takes this honor upon himself
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 219 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS To him be glory forever and ever. Amen.
THIRTIETH SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Sir 35:12-14, 16-18) ALLELUIA (2 Cor 5:19)
A reading from the Book of Sirach: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
THE LORD is a God of justice, God was reconciling the world to himself in Christ,
who knows no favorites. and entrusting to us the message of salvation.—R.
Though not unduly partial toward the weak,
yet he hears the cry of the oppressed. GOSPEL (Lk 18:9-14)
The Lord is not deaf to the wail of the orphan,
nor to the widow when she pours out her complaint. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
The one who serves God willingly is heard;
his petition reaches the heavens. JESUS addressed this parable
The prayer of the lowly pierces the clouds; to those who were convinced of their own righteousness
it does not rest till it reaches its goal, and despised everyone else.
nor will it withdraw till the Most High responds, "Two people went up to the temple area to pray;
judges justly and affirms the right, one was a Pharisee and the other was a tax collector.
and the Lord will not delay. The Pharisee took up his position and spoke this prayer to himself,
'O God, I thank you that I am not like the rest of humanity—
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. greedy, dishonest, adulterous—or even like this tax collector.
I fast twice a week, and I pay tithes on my whole income.'
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 34:2-3, 17-18, 19, 23) But the tax collector stood off at a distance
and would not even raise his eyes to heaven
R. (7a) The Lord hears the cry of the poor. but beat his breast and prayed,
'O God, be merciful to me a sinner.'
I will bless the LORD at all times; I tell you, the latter went home justified, not the former;
his praise shall be ever in my mouth. for whoever exalts himself will be humbled,
Let my soul glory in the Lord; and the one who humbles himself will be exalted."
the lowly will hear me and be glad.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The LORD confronts the evildoers,
to destroy remembrance of them from the earth.
When the just cry out, the Lord hears them,
and from all their distress he rescues them.—R.
The LORD is close to the brokenhearted;
and those who are crushed in spirit he saves.
The LORD redeems the lives of his servants;
no one incurs guilt who takes refuge in him.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Tm 4:6-8, 16-18)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy:
BELOVED:
I am already being poured out like a libation,
and the time of my departure is at hand.
I have competed well; I have finished the race;
I have kept the faith.
From now on the crown of righteousness awaits me,
which the Lord, the just judge,
will award to me on that day, and not only to me,
but to all who have longed for his appearance.
At my first defense no one appeared on my behalf,
but everyone deserted me.
May it not be held against them!
But the Lord stood by me and gave me strength,
so that through me the proclamation might be completed
and all the Gentiles might hear it.
And I was rescued from the lion's mouth.
The Lord will rescue me from every evil threat
and will bring me safe to his heavenly kingdom.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 220 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Matthew 23:9b, 10b)
THIRTY-FIRST SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Mal 1:14b-2:2b, 8-10) You have but one Father in heaven
and one master, the Christ.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Malachi:
GOSPEL (Mt 23:1-12)
A GREAT King am I, says the LORD of hosts,
and my name will be feared among the nations. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
And now, O priests, this commandment is for you:
If you do not listen, JESUS spoke to the crowds and to his disciples, saying,
if you do not lay it to heart, "The scribes and the Pharisees
to give glory to my name, says the LORD of hosts, have taken their seat on the chair of Moses.
I will send a curse upon you Therefore, do and observe all things whatsoever they tell you,
and of your blessing I will make a curse. but do not follow their example.
You have turned aside from the way, For they preach but they do not practice.
and have caused many to falter by your instruction; They tie up heavy burdens hard to carry
you have made void the covenant of Levi, and lay them on people's shoulders,
says the LORD of hosts. but they will not lift a finger to move them.
I, therefore, have made you contemptible All their works are performed to be seen.
and base before all the people, They widen their phylacteries and lengthen their tassels.
since you do not keep my ways, They love places of honor at banquets, seats of honor in synagogues,
but show partiality in your decisions. greetings in marketplaces, and the salutation 'Rabbi.'
Have we not all the one father? As for you, do not be called 'Rabbi.'
Has not the one God created us? You have but one teacher, and you are all brothers.
Why then do we break faith with one another, Call no one on earth your father;
violating the covenant of our fathers? you have but one Father in heaven.
Do not be called 'Master';
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. you have but one master, the Christ.
The greatest among you must be your servant.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 131:1, 2, 3) Whoever exalts himself will be humbled;
but whoever humbles himself will be exalted."
R. In you, Lord, I have found my peace.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
O LORD, my heart is not proud,
nor are my eyes haughty;
I busy not myself with great things,
nor with things too sublime for me.—R.
Nay rather, I have stilled and quieted
my soul like a weaned child.
Like a weaned child on its mother's lap,
so is my soul within me.—R.
O Israel, hope in the LORD,
both now and forever.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Thes 2:7b-9, 13)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
We were gentle among you, as a nursing mother cares for her children.
With such affection for you, we were determined to share with you
not only the gospel of God, but our very selves as well,
so dearly beloved had you become to us.
You recall, brothers and sisters, our toil and drudgery.
Working night and day in order not to burden any of you,
we proclaimed to you the gospel of God.
And for this reason we too give thanks to God unceasingly,
that, in receiving the word of God from hearing us,
you received not a human word but, as it truly is, the word of God,
which is now at work in you who believe.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 221 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS appoints a son,
THIRTY-FIRST SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B who has been made perfect forever.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Deut 6:2-6)
ALLELUIA (John 14:23)
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy:
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
MOSES spoke to the people, saying:
"Fear the LORD, your God, Whoever loves me will keep my word,
and keep, throughout the days of your lives, says the Lord; and my Father will love him
all his statutes and commandments which I enjoin on you, and we will come to him.—R.
and thus have long life.
Hear then, Israel, and be careful to observe them, GOSPEL (Mk 12:28b-34)
that you may grow and prosper the more,
in keeping with the promise of the LORD, the God of your fathers, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
to give you a land flowing with milk and honey.
ONE of the scribes came to Jesus and asked him,
"Hear, O Israel! The LORD is our God, the LORD alone! "Which is the first of all the commandments?"
Therefore, you shall love the LORD, your God, Jesus replied, "The first is this:
with all your heart, Hear, O Israel!
and with all your soul, The Lord our God is Lord alone!
and with all your strength. You shall love the Lord your God with all your heart,
Take to heart these words which I enjoin on you today." with all your soul,
with all your mind,
The word of the Lord.—R. thanks be to God. and with all your strength.
The second is this:
You shall love your neighbor as yourself.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 18:2-3, 3-4, 47, 51) There is no other commandment greater than these."
The scribe said to him, "Well said, teacher.
R. (2) I love you, Lord, my strength. You are right in saying,
'He is One and there is no other than he.'
I love you, O LORD, my strength, And 'to love him with all your heart,
O LORD, my rock, my fortress, my deliverer.—R. with all your understanding,
with all your strength,
My God, my rock of refuge, and to love your neighbor as yourself'
my shield, the horn of my salvation, my stronghold! is worth more than all burnt offerings and sacrifices."
Praised be the LORD, I exclaim, And when Jesus saw that he answered with understanding,
and I am safe from my enemies.—R. he said to him,
"You are not far from the kingdom of God."
The LORD lives! And blessed be my rock! And no one dared to ask him any more questions.
Extolled be God my savior.
You who gave great victories to your king The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and showed kindness to your anointed.—R.
SECOND READING (Heb 7:23-28)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
BROTHERS and sisters:
The levitical priests were many
because they were prevented by death from remaining in office,
but Jesus, because he remains forever,
has a priesthood that does not pass away.
Therefore, he is always able to save those who approach God through him,
since he lives forever to make intercession for them.
It was fitting that we should have such a high priest:
holy, innocent, undefiled, separated from sinners,
higher than the heavens.
He has no need, as did the high priests,
to offer sacrifice day after day,
first for his own sins and then for those of the people;
he did that once for all when he offered himself.
For the law appoints men subject to weakness to be high priests,
but the word of the oath, which was taken after the law,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 222 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and our assembling with him,
THIRTY-FIRST SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C not to be shaken out of your minds suddenly, or to be alarmed
either by a "spirit," or by an oral statement,
or by a letter allegedly from us
FIRST READING (Wis 11:22-12:2) to the effect that the day of the Lord is at hand.
A reading from the Book of Wisdom: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
BEFORE the LORD the whole universe is as a grain from a balance ALLELUIA (John 3:16)
or a drop of morning dew come down upon the earth.
But you have mercy on all, because you can do all things; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and you overlook people's sins that they may repent.
For you love all things that are God so loved the world that he gave his only Son, so
and loathe nothing that you have made; that everyone who believes in him might have eternal life.—R.
for what you hated, you would not have fashioned.
And how could a thing remain, unless you willed it; GOSPEL (Lk 19:1-10)
or be preserved, had it not been called forth by you?
But you spare all things, because they are yours, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
O LORD and lover of souls,
for your imperishable spirit is in all things! AT that time, Jesus came to Jericho and intended to pass through the town.
Therefore you rebuke offenders little by little, Now a man there named Zacchaeus,
warn them and remind them of the sins they are committing, who was a chief tax collector and also a wealthy man,
that they may abandon their wickedness and believe in you, was seeking to see who Jesus was;
O LORD! but he could not see him because of the crowd,
for he was short in stature.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. So he ran ahead and climbed a sycamore tree in order to see Jesus,
who was about to pass that way.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 145:1-2, 8-9, 10-11, 13, 14) When he reached the place, Jesus looked up and said,
"Zacchaeus, come down quickly,
R. (cf. 1) I will praise your name for ever, my king and my God. for today I must stay at your house."
And he came down quickly and received him with joy.
I will extol you, O my God and King, When they all saw this, they began to grumble, saying,
and I will bless your name forever and ever. "He has gone to stay at the house of a sinner."
Every day will I bless you, But Zacchaeus stood there and said to the Lord,
and I will praise your name forever and ever.—R. "Behold, half of my possessions, Lord, I shall give to the poor,
and if I have extorted anything from anyone
The LORD is gracious and merciful, I shall repay it four times over."
slow to anger and of great kindness. And Jesus said to him,
The LORD is good to all "Today salvation has come to this house
and compassionate toward all his works.—R. because this man too is a descendant of Abraham.
For the Son of Man has come to seek
Let all your works give you thanks, O LORD, and to save what was lost."
and let your faithful ones bless you.
Let them discourse of the glory of your kingdom The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and speak of your might.—R.
The LORD is faithful in all his words
and holy in all his works.
The LORD lifts up all who are falling
and raises up all who are bowed down.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Thes 1:11-2:2)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
We always pray for you,
that our God may make you worthy of his calling
and powerfully bring to fulfillment every good purpose
and every effort of faith,
that the name of our Lord Jesus may be glorified in you,
and you in him,
in accord with the grace of our God and Lord Jesus Christ.
We ask you, brothers and sisters,
with regard to the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 223 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Then we who are alive, who are left,
THIRTY-SECOND SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A will be caught up together with them in the clouds
to meet the Lord in the air.
Thus we shall always be with the Lord.
FIRST READING (Wis 6:12-16) Therefore, console one another with these words.
A reading from the Book of Wisdom: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
RESPLENDENT and unfading is wisdom, ALLELUIA (Matthew 24:42a, 44)
and she is readily perceived by those who love her,
and found by those who seek her. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
She hastens to make herself known in anticipation of their desire;
Whoever watches for her at dawn shall not be disappointed, Stay awake and be ready!
for he shall find her sitting by his gate. For you do not know on what day your Lord will come.—R.
For taking thought of wisdom is the perfection of prudence,
and whoever for her sake keeps vigil GOSPEL (Mt 25:1-13)
shall quickly be free from care;
because she makes her own rounds, seeking those worthy of her, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
and graciously appears to them in the ways,
and meets them with all solicitude. JESUS told his disciples this parable:
"The kingdom of heaven will be like ten virgins
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. who took their lamps and went out to meet the bridegroom.
Five of them were foolish and five were wise.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 63:2, 3-4, 5-6, 7-8) The foolish ones, when taking their lamps,
brought no oil with them,
R. (2b) My soul is thirsting for you, O Lord my God. but the wise brought flasks of oil with their lamps.
Since the bridegroom was long delayed,
O God, you are my God whom I seek; they all became drowsy and fell asleep.
for you my flesh pines and my soul thirsts At midnight, there was a cry,
like the earth, parched, lifeless and without water.—R. 'Behold, the bridegroom! Come out to meet him!'
Then all those virgins got up and trimmed their lamps.
Thus have I gazed toward you in the sanctuary The foolish ones said to the wise,
to see your power and your glory, 'Give us some of your oil,
For your kindness is a greater good than life; for our lamps are going out.'
my lips shall glorify you.—R. But the wise ones replied,
'No, for there may not be enough for us and you.
Thus will I bless you while I live; Go instead to the merchants and buy some for yourselves.'
lifting up my hands, I will call upon your name. While they went off to buy it,
As with the riches of a banquet shall my soul be satisfied, the bridegroom came
and with exultant lips my mouth shall praise you.—R. and those who were ready went into the wedding feast with him.
Then the door was locked.
I will remember you upon my couch, Afterwards the other virgins came and said,
and through the night-watches I will meditate on you: 'Lord, Lord, open the door for us!'
You are my help, But he said in reply,
and in the shadow of your wings I shout for joy.—R. 'Amen, I say to you, I do not know you.'
Therefore, stay awake,
SECOND READING (1 Thes 4:13-18 or 4:13-14) for you know neither the day nor the hour."
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians: The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
[ WE do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters,
about those who have fallen asleep,
so that you may not grieve like the rest, who have no hope.
For if we believe that Jesus died and rose,
so too will God, through Jesus,
bring with him those who have fallen asleep. ]
Indeed, we tell you this, on the word of the Lord,
that we who are alive,
who are left until the coming of the Lord,
will surely not precede those who have fallen asleep.
For the Lord himself, with a word of command,
with the voice of an archangel and with the trumpet of God,
will come down from heaven,
and the dead in Christ will rise first.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 224 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS with blood that is not his own;
THIRTY-SECOND SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B if that were so, he would have had to suffer repeatedly
from the foundation of the world.
But now once for all he has appeared at the end of the ages
FIRST READING (1 Kgs 17:10-16) to take away sin by his sacrifice.
Just as it is appointed that human beings die once,
A reading from the first Book of Kings: and after this the judgment, so also Christ,
offered once to take away the sins of many,
IN those days, Elijah the prophet went to Zarephath. will appear a second time, not to take away sin
As he arrived at the entrance of the city, but to bring salvation to those who eagerly await him.
a widow was gathering sticks there; he called out to her,
"Please bring me a small cupful of water to drink." The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
She left to get it, and he called out after her,
"Please bring along a bit of bread." ALLELUIA (Matthew 5:3)
She answered, "As the LORD, your God, lives,
I have nothing baked; there is only a handful of flour in my jar R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and a little oil in my jug.
Just now I was collecting a couple of sticks, Blessed are the poor in spirit,
to go in and prepare something for myself and my son; for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.—R.
when we have eaten it, we shall die."
Elijah said to her, "Do not be afraid. GOSPEL (Mk 12:38-44 or 12:41-44)
Go and do as you propose.
But first make me a little cake and bring it to me. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
Then you can prepare something for yourself and your son.
For the LORD, the God of Israel, says, [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
'The jar of flour shall not go empty,
nor the jug of oil run dry, IN the course of his teaching Jesus said to the crowds,
until the day when the LORD sends rain upon the earth.'" "Beware of the scribes, who like to go around in long robes
She left and did as Elijah had said. and accept greetings in the marketplaces,
She was able to eat for a year, and he and her son as well; seats of honor in synagogues,
the jar of flour did not go empty, and places of honor at banquets.
nor the jug of oil run dry, They devour the houses of widows and, as a pretext
as the LORD had foretold through Elijah. recite lengthy prayers.
They will receive a very severe condemnation."
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
[ He sat down opposite the treasury
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 146:7, 8-9, 9-10) and observed how the crowd put money into the treasury.
Many rich people put in large sums.
R. (1b) Praise the Lord, my soul! A poor widow also came and put in two small coins worth a few cents.
or: Calling his disciples to himself, he said to them,
R. Alleluia. "Amen, I say to you, this poor widow put in more
than all the other contributors to the treasury.
The LORD keeps faith forever, For they have all contributed from their surplus wealth,
secures justice for the oppressed, but she, from her poverty, has contributed all she had,
gives food to the hungry. her whole livelihood." ]
The LORD sets captives free.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The LORD gives sight to the blind.
the LORD raises up those who were bowed down;
The LORD loves the just;
the LORD protects strangers.—R.
The fatherless and the widow he sustains,
but the way of the wicked he thwarts.
The LORD shall reign forever;
your God, O Zion, through all generations. Alleluia.—R.
SECOND READING (Heb 9:24-28)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
CHRIST did not enter into a sanctuary made by hands,
a copy of the true one, but heaven itself,
that he might now appear before God on our behalf.
Not that he might offer himself repeatedly,
as the high priest enters each year into the sanctuary
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 225 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Finally, brothers and sisters, pray for us,
THIRTY-SECOND SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C so that the word of the Lord may speed forward and be glorified,
as it did among you,
and that we may be delivered from perverse and wicked people,
FIRST READING (2 Mc 7:1-2, 9-14) for not all have faith.
But the Lord is faithful;
A reading from the second Book of Maccabees: he will strengthen you and guard you from the evil one.
We are confident of you in the Lord that what we instruct you,
IT happened that seven brothers with their mother were arrested you are doing and will continue to do.
and tortured with whips and scourges by the king, May the Lord direct your hearts to the love of God
to force them to eat pork in violation of God's law. and to the endurance of Christ.
One of the brothers, speaking for the others, said:
"What do you expect to achieve by questioning us? The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
We are ready to die rather than transgress the laws of our ancestors."
ALLELUIA (Revelation 1:5a, 6b)
At the point of death he said:
"You accursed fiend, you are depriving us of this present life, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
but the King of the world will raise us up to live again forever.
It is for his laws that we are dying." Jesus Christ is the first born of the dead;
to him be glory and power, forever and ever.—R.
After him the third suffered their cruel sport.
He put out his tongue at once when told to do so, GOSPEL (Lk 20:27-38 or 20:27, 34-38)
and bravely held out his hands, as he spoke these noble words:
"It was from Heaven that I received these; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
for the sake of his laws I disdain them;
from him I hope to receive them again." [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
Even the king and his attendants marveled at the young man's courage,
because he regarded his sufferings as nothing. [ SOME Sadducees, those who deny that there is a resurrection,
came forward ] and put this question to Jesus, saying,
After he had died, "Teacher, Moses wrote for us,
they tortured and maltreated the fourth brother in the same way. If someone's brother dies leaving a wife but no child,
When he was near death, he said, his brother must take the wife
"It is my choice to die at the hands of men and raise up descendants for his brother.
with the hope God gives of being raised up by him; Now there were seven brothers;
but for you, there will be no resurrection to life." the first married a woman but died childless.
Then the second and the third married her,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. and likewise all the seven died childless.
Finally the woman also died.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 17:1, 5-6, 8, 15) Now at the resurrection whose wife will that woman be?
For all seven had been married to her."
R. (15b) Lord, when your glory appears, my joy will be full. [ Jesus said to them,
"The children of this age marry and remarry;
Hear, O LORD, a just suit; but those who are deemed worthy to attain to the coming age
attend to my outcry; and to the resurrection of the dead
hearken to my prayer from lips without deceit.—R. neither marry nor are given in marriage.
They can no longer die,
My steps have been steadfast in your paths, for they are like angels;
my feet have not faltered. and they are the children of God
I call upon you, for you will answer me, O God; because they are the ones who will rise.
incline your ear to me; hear my word.—R. That the dead will rise
even Moses made known in the passage about the bush,
Keep me as the apple of your eye, when he called out 'Lord,'
hide me in the shadow of your wings. the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob;
But I in justice shall behold your face; and he is not God of the dead, but of the living,
on waking I shall be content in your presence.—R. for to him all are alive." ]
SECOND READING (2 Thes 2:16-3:5) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
May our Lord Jesus Christ himself and God our Father,
who has loved us and given us everlasting encouragement
and good hope through his grace,
encourage your hearts and strengthen them in every good
deed and word.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 226 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS but let us stay alert and sober.
THIRTY-THIRD SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Prv 31:10-13, 19-20, 30-31) ALLELUIA (John 15:4a, 5b)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
A reading from the Book of Proverbs:
Remain in me as I remain in you, says the Lord.
WHEN one finds a worthy wife,
Whoever remains in me bears much fruit.–R.
her value is far beyond pearls.
Her husband, entrusting his heart to her,
GOSPEL (Mt 25:14-30 or 25:14-15, 19-21)
has an unfailing prize.
She brings him good, and not evil,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
all the days of her life.
She obtains wool and flax
[ Shorter form in brackets. ]
and works with loving hands.
She puts her hands to the distaff,
[ JESUS told his disciples this parable:
and her fingers ply the spindle.
"A man going on a journey
She reaches out her hands to the poor,
called in his servants and entrusted his possessions to them.
and extends her arms to the needy.
To one he gave five talents; to another, two; to a third, one-
Charm is deceptive and beauty fleeting;
to each according to his ability.
the woman who fears the LORD is to be praised. Then he went away. ]
Give her a reward for her labors, Immediately the one who received five talents went and traded with them,
and let her works praise her at the city gates. and made another five.
Likewise, the one who received two made another two.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. But the man who received one went off and dug a hole in the ground
and buried his master's money.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 128:1-2, 3, 4-5)
[ After a long time
R. (cf. 1a) Blessed are those who fear the Lord. the master of those servants came back
and settled accounts with them.
Blessed are you who fear the LORD, The one who had received five talents came forward
who walk in his ways! bringing the additional five.
For you shall eat the fruit of your handiwork; He said, 'Master, you gave me five talents.
blessed shall you be, and favored.—R. See, I have made five more.'
His master said to him, 'Well done, my good and faithful servant.
Your wife shall be like a fruitful vine Since you were faithful in small matters,
in the recesses of your home; I will give you great responsibilities.
Your children like olive plants Come, share your master's joy.' ]
around your table.—R. Then the one who had received two talents also came forward and said,
'Master, you gave me two talents.
Behold, thus is the man blessed See, I have made two more.'
who fears the LORD. His master said to him, 'Well done, my good and faithful servant.
The LORD bless you from Zion: Since you were faithful in small matters,
may you see the prosperity of Jerusalem I will give you great responsibilities.
all the days of your life.—R. Come, share your master's joy.'
Then the one who had received the one talent came forward and said,
'Master, I knew you were a demanding person,
SECOND READING (1 Thes 5:1-6)
harvesting where you did not plant
and gathering where you did not scatter;
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians:
so out of fear I went off and buried your talent in the ground.
Here it is back.'
CONCERNING times and seasons, brothers and sisters,
His master said to him in reply, 'You wicked, lazy servant!
you have no need for anything to be written to you.
So you knew that I harvest where I did not plant
For you yourselves know very well that the day of the Lord will come
and gather where I did not scatter?
like a thief at night.
Should you not then have put my money in the bank
When people are saying, "Peace and security,"
so that I could have got it back with interest on my return?
then sudden disaster comes upon them,
Now then! Take the talent from him and give it to the one with ten.
like labor pains upon a pregnant woman,
For to everyone who has,
and they will not escape.
more will be given and he will grow rich;
but from the one who has not,
But you, brothers and sisters, are not in darkness,
even what he has will be taken away.
for that day to overtake you like a thief.
And throw this useless servant into the darkness outside,
For all of you are children of the light where there will be wailing and grinding of teeth.'"
and children of the day.
We are not of the night or of darkness. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Therefore, let us not sleep as the rest do,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 227 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Luke 21:36)
THIRTY-THIRD SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Dn 12:1-3) Be vigilant at all times
and pray that you have the strength to stand before
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Daniel: the Son of Man.—R.
IN those days, I Daniel, GOSPEL (Mk 13:24-32)
heard this word of the Lord:
"At that time there shall arise + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
Michael, the great prince,
guardian of your people; JESUS said to his disciples:
it shall be a time unsurpassed in distress "In those days after that tribulation
since nations began until that time. the sun will be darkened,
At that time your people shall escape, and the moon will not give its light,
everyone who is found written in the book. and the stars will be falling from the sky,
and the powers in the heavens will be shaken.
Many of those who sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake;
some shall live forever, "And then they will see 'the Son of Man coming in the clouds'
others shall be an everlasting horror and disgrace. with great power and glory,
and then he will send out the angels
But the wise shall shine brightly and gather his elect from the four winds,
like the splendor of the firmament, from the end of the earth to the end of the sky.
and those who lead the many to justice
shall be like the stars forever." "Learn a lesson from the fig tree.
When its branch becomes tender and sprouts leaves,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. you know that summer is near.
In the same way, when you see these things happening,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 16:5, 8, 9-10, 11) know that he is near, at the gates.
Amen, I say to you,
R. (1) You are my inheritance, O Lord! this generation will not pass away
until all these things have taken place.
O LORD, my allotted portion and my cup, Heaven and earth will pass away,
you it is who hold fast my lot. but my words will not pass away.
I set the LORD ever before me;
with him at my right hand I shall not be disturbed.—R. "But of that day or hour, no one knows,
neither the angels in heaven, nor the Son, but only the Father."
Therefore my heart is glad and my soul rejoices,
my body, too, abides in confidence; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
because you will not abandon my soul to the netherworld,
nor will you suffer your faithful one to undergo corruption.—R.
You will show me the path to life,
fullness of joys in your presence,
the delights at your right hand forever.—R.
SECOND READING (Heb 10:11-14, 18)
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Every priest stands daily at his ministry,
offering frequently those same sacrifices
that can never take away sins.
But this one offered one sacrifice for sins,
and took his seat forever at the right hand of God;
now he waits until his enemies are made his footstool.
For by one offering
he has made perfect forever those who are being consecrated.
Where there is forgiveness of these,
there is no longer offering for sin.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 228 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS because your redemption is at hand.—R.
THIRTY-THIRD SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
GOSPEL (Lk 21:5-19)
FIRST READING (Mal 3:19-20a) A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Malachi: WHILE some people were speaking about
how the temple was adorned with costly stones and votive offerings,
LO, the day is coming, blazing like an oven, Jesus said, "All that you see here—
when all the proud and all evildoers will be stubble, the days will come when there will not be left
and the day that is coming will set them on fire, a stone upon another stone that will not be thrown down."
leaving them neither root nor branch,
says the LORD of hosts. Then they asked him,
But for you who fear my name, there will arise "Teacher, when will this happen?
the sun of justice with its healing rays. And what sign will there be when all these things are about to happen?"
He answered,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. "See that you not be deceived,
for many will come in my name, saying,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 98:5-6, 7-8, 9) 'I am he,' and 'The time has come.'
Do not follow them!
R. (cf. 9) The Lord comes to rule the earth with justice. When you hear of wars and insurrections,
do not be terrified; for such things must happen first,
Sing praise to the LORD with the harp, but it will not immediately be the end."
with the harp and melodious song. Then he said to them,
With trumpets and the sound of the horn "Nation will rise against nation, and kingdom against kingdom.
sing joyfully before the King, the LORD.—R. There will be powerful earthquakes, famines, and plagues
from place to place;
Let the sea and what fills it resound, and awesome sights and mighty signs will come from the sky.
the world and those who dwell in it;
let the rivers clap their hands, "Before all this happens, however,
the mountains shout with them for joy.—R. they will seize and persecute you,
they will hand you over to the synagogues and to prisons,
Before the LORD, for he comes, and they will have you led before kings and governors
for he comes to rule the earth, because of my name.
He will rule the world with justice It will lead to your giving testimony.
and the peoples with equity.—R. Remember, you are not to prepare your defense beforehand,
for I myself shall give you a wisdom in speaking
SECOND READING (2 Thes 3:7-12) that all your adversaries will be powerless to resist or refute.
You will even be handed over by parents, brothers, relatives,
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians: and friends,
and they will put some of you to death.
BROTHERS and sisters: You will be hated by all because of my name,
You know how one must imitate us. but not a hair on your head will be destroyed.
For we did not act in a disorderly way among you, By your perseverance you will secure your lives."
nor did we eat food received free from anyone.
On the contrary, in toil and drudgery, night and day The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
we worked, so as not to burden any of you.
Not that we do not have the right.
Rather, we wanted to present ourselves as a model for you,
so that you might imitate us.
In fact, when we were with you,
we instructed you that if anyone was unwilling to work,
neither should that one eat.
We hear that some are conducting themselves among you in a
disorderly way,
by not keeping busy but minding the business of others.
Such people we instruct and urge in the Lord Jesus Christ to work quietly
and to eat their own food.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Luke 21:28)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Stand erect and raise your heads
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 229 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS when he hands over the kingdom to his God and Father,
THIRTY-FOURTH (OR LAST) SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—A when he has destroyed every sovereignty
SOLEMNITY OF CHRIST THE KING and every authority and power.
For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet.
The last enemy to be destroyed is death.
When everything is subjected to him,
FIRST READING (Ez 34:11-12, 15-17)
then the Son himself will also be subjected
to the one who subjected everything to him,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel:
so that God may be all in all.
THUS says the Lord GOD:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
I myself will look after and tend my sheep.
As a shepherd tends his flock
ALLELUIA (Mark 11:9, 10)
when he finds himself among his scattered sheep,
so will I tend my sheep.
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
I will rescue them from every place where they were scattered
when it was cloudy and dark.
Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!
I myself will pasture my sheep;
Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is to come!—R.
I myself will give them rest, says the Lord GOD.
The lost I will seek out,
GOSPEL (Mt 25:31-46)
the strayed I will bring back,
the injured I will bind up,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
the sick I will heal,
but the sleek and the strong I will destroy,
JESUS said to his disciples:
shepherding them rightly.
"When the Son of Man comes in his glory,
and all the angels with him,
As for you, my sheep, says the Lord GOD,
he will sit upon his glorious throne,
I will judge between one sheep and another,
and all the nations will be assembled before him.
between rams and goats.
And he will separate them one from another,
as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
He will place the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
Then the king will say to those on his right,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 23:1-2, 2-3, 5-6)
'Come, you who are blessed by my Father.
Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the world.
R. (1) The Lord is my shepherd; there is nothing I shall want.
For I was hungry and you gave me food,
I was thirsty and you gave me drink,
The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want.
a stranger and you welcomed me,
In verdant pastures he gives me repose.—R.
naked and you clothed me,
ill and you cared for me,
Beside restful waters he leads me;
in prison and you visited me.'
he refreshes my soul.
Then the righteous will answer him and say,
He guides me in right paths
'Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you,
for his name's sake.—R.
or thirsty and give you drink?
When did we see you a stranger and welcome you,
You spread the table before me
or naked and clothe you?
in the sight of my foes;
When did we see you ill or in prison, and visit you?'
you anoint my head with oil;
And the king will say to them in reply,
my cup overflows.—R.
'Amen, I say to you, whatever you did
for one of the least brothers of mine, you did for me.'
Only goodness and kindness follow me
Then he will say to those on his left,
all the days of my life;
'Depart from me, you accursed,
and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD
into the eternal fire prepared for the devil and his angels.
for years to come.—R.
For I was hungry and you gave me no food,
I was thirsty and you gave me no drink,
SECOND READING (1 Cor 15:20-26, 28)
a stranger and you gave me no welcome,
naked and you gave me no clothing,
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
ill and in prison, and you did not care for me.'
Then they will answer and say,
BROTHERS and sisters:
'Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty
Christ has been raised from the dead,
or a stranger or naked or ill or in prison,
the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
and not minister to your needs?'
For since death came through man,
He will answer them, 'Amen, I say to you,
the resurrection of the dead came also through man.
what you did not do for one of these least ones,
For just as in Adam all die,
you did not do for me.'
so too in Christ shall all be brought to life,
And these will go off to eternal punishment,
but each one in proper order:
but the righteous to eternal life."
Christ the firstfruits;
then, at his coming, those who belong to Christ;
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
then comes the end,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 230 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Jn 18:33b-37)
THIRTY-FOURTH (OR LAST) SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—B
SOLEMNITY OF CHRIST THE KING + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
PILATE said to Jesus,
FIRST READING (Dn 7:13-14) "Are you the King of the Jews?"
Jesus answered, "Do you say this on your own
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Daniel: or have others told you about me?"
Pilate answered, "I am not a Jew, am I?
AS the visions during the night continued, I saw Your own nation and the chief priests handed you over to me.
one like a Son of man coming, What have you done?"
on the clouds of heaven; Jesus answered, "My kingdom does not belong to this world.
when he reached the Ancient One If my kingdom did belong to this world,
and was presented before him, my attendants would be fighting
the one like a Son of man received dominion, glory, and kingship; to keep me from being handed over to the Jews.
all peoples, nations, and languages serve him. But as it is, my kingdom is not here."
His dominion is an everlasting dominion So Pilate said to him, "Then you are a king?"
that shall not be taken away, Jesus answered, "You say I am a king.
his kingship shall not be destroyed. For this I was born and for this I came into the world,
to testify to the truth.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Everyone who belongs to the truth listens to my voice."
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 93:1, 1-2, 5) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
R. (1a) The LORD is king; he is robed in majesty.
The LORD is king, in splendor robed;
robed is the LORD and girt about with strength.—R.
And he has made the world firm,
not to be moved.
Your throne stands firm from of old;
from everlasting you are, O Lord.—R.
Your decrees are worthy of trust indeed;
holiness befits your house,
O Lord, for length of days.—R.
SECOND READING (Rev 1:5-8)
A reading from the Book of Revelation:
JESUS Christ is the faithful witness,
the firstborn of the dead and ruler of the kings of the earth.
To him who loves us and has freed us from our sins by his blood,
who has made us into a kingdom, priests for his God and Father,
to him be glory and power forever and ever. Amen.
Behold, he is coming amid the clouds,
and every eye will see him,
even those who pierced him.
All the peoples of the earth will lament him.
Yes. Amen.
"I am the Alpha and the Omega," says the Lord God,
"the one who is and who was and who is to come, the almighty."
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Mark 11:9, 10)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!
Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is to come!—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 231 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS through him, whether those on earth or those in heaven.
THIRTY-FOURTH (OR LAST) SUNDAY IN ORDINARY TIME—C
SOLEMNITY OF CHRIST THE KING The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Mark 11:9, 10)
FIRST READING (2 Sam 5:1-3)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
A reading from the second Book of Samuel:
Blessed is he who comes in the name of the Lord!
IN those days, all the tribes of Israel came to David in Hebron and said: Blessed is the kingdom of our father David that is to come!—R.
"Here we are, your bone and your flesh.
In days past, when Saul was our king, GOSPEL (Lk 23:35-43)
it was you who led the Israelites out and brought them back.
And the LORD said to you, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
'You shall shepherd my people Israel
and shall be commander of Israel.'" THE rulers sneered at Jesus and said,
When all the elders of Israel came to David in Hebron, "He saved others, let him save himself
King David made an agreement with them there before the LORD, if he is the chosen one, the Christ of God."
and they anointed him king of Israel. Even the soldiers jeered at him.
As they approached to offer him wine they called out,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. "If you are King of the Jews, save yourself."
Above him there was an inscription that read,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 122:1-2, 3-4, 4-5) "This is the King of the Jews."
R. (cf. 1) Let us go rejoicing to the house of the Lord. Now one of the criminals hanging there reviled Jesus, saying,
"Are you not the Christ?
I rejoiced because they said to me, Save yourself and us."
"We will go up to the house of the LORD." The other, however, rebuking him, said in reply,
And now we have set foot "Have you no fear of God,
within your gates, O Jerusalem.—R. for you are subject to the same condemnation?
And indeed, we have been condemned justly,
Jerusalem, built as a city for the sentence we received corresponds to our crimes,
with compact unity. but this man has done nothing criminal."
To it the tribes go up, Then he said,
the tribes of the LORD.—R. "Jesus, remember me when you come into your kingdom."
He replied to him,
According to the decree for Israel, "Amen, I say to you,
to give thanks to the name of the LORD. today you will be with me in Paradise."
In it are set up judgment seats,
seats for the house of David.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
SECOND READING (Col 1:12-20)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Colossians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Let us give thanks to the Father,
who has made you fit to share
in the inheritance of the holy ones in light.
He delivered us from the power of darkness
and transferred us to the kingdom of his beloved Son,
in whom we have redemption, the forgiveness of sins.
He is the image of the invisible God,
the firstborn of all creation.
For in him were created all things in heaven and on earth,
the visible and the invisible,
whether thrones or dominions or principalities or powers;
all things were created through him and for him.
He is before all things,
and in him all things hold together.
He is the head of the body, the church.
He is the beginning, the firstborn from the dead,
that in all things he himself might be preeminent.
For in him all the fullness was pleased to dwell,
and through him to reconcile all things for him,
making peace by the blood of his cross
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 232 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS GOSPEL (Lk 2:16-21)
MARY, MOTHER OF GOD—ABC (January 1)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
FIRST READING (Nm 6:22-27) THE shepherds went in haste to Bethlehem and found Mary and Joseph,
and the infant lying in the manger.
A reading from the Book of Numbers: When they saw this,
they made known the message
THE LORD said to Moses: that had been told them about this child.
“Speak to Aaron and his sons and tell them: All who heard it were amazed
This is how you shall bless the Israelites. by what had been told them by the shepherds.
Say to them: And Mary kept all these things,
The LORD bless you and keep you! reflecting on them in her heart.
The LORD let his face shine upon Then the shepherds returned,
you, and be gracious to you! glorifying and praising God
The LORD look upon you kindly and for all they had heard and seen,
give you peace! just as it had been told to them.
So shall they invoke my name upon the Israelites, When eight days were completed for his circumcision,
and I will bless them.” he was named Jesus, the name given him by the angel
before he was conceived in the womb.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 67:2-3, 5, 6, 8)
R. (2a) May God bless us in his mercy.
May God have pity on us and bless us;
may he let his face shine upon us.
So may your way be known upon earth;
among all nations, your salvation.—R.
May the nations be glad and exult
because you rule the peoples in equity;
the nations on the earth you guide.—R.
May the peoples praise you, O God;
may all the peoples praise you!
May God bless us,
and may all the ends of the earth fear him!—R.
SECOND READING (Gal 4:4-7)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
When the fullness of time had come, God sent his Son,
born of a woman, born under the law,
to ransom those under the law,
so that we might receive adoption as sons.
As proof that you are sons,
God sent the Spirit of his Son into our hearts,
crying out, “Abba, Father!”
So you are no longer a slave but a son,
and if a son then also an heir, through God.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (Hebrews 1:1-2)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
In the past God spoke to our ancestors through the prophets;
in these last days, he has spoken to us through the Son.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 233 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA Luke 2:32
PRESENTATION OF THE LORD—ABC (February 2)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
FIRST READING (Mal 3:1-4) A light of revelation to the Gentiles,
and glory for your people Israel.—R.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Malachi:
GOSPEL (Lk 2:22-40 or 2:22-32)
THUS says the Lord God:
Lo, I am sending my messenger + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
to prepare the way before me;
And suddenly there will come to the temple [ Shorter form in brackets. ]
the LORD whom you seek,
And the messenger of the covenant whom you desire. [ WHEN the days were completed for their purification
Yes, he is coming, says the LORD of hosts. according to the law of Moses,
But who will endure the day of his coming? Mary and Joseph took Jesus up to Jerusalem
And who can stand when he appears? to present him to the Lord,
For he is like the refiner’s fire, just as it is written in the law of the Lord,
or like the fuller’s lye. Every male that opens the womb shall be consecrated to the Lord,
He will sit refining and purifying silver, and to offer the sacrifice of
and he will purify the sons of Levi, a pair of turtledoves or two young pigeons,
Refining them like gold or like silver in accordance with the dictate in the law of the Lord.
that they may offer due sacrifice to the LORD.
Then the sacrifice of Judah and Jerusalem Now there was a man in Jerusalem whose name was Simeon.
will please the LORD, This man was righteous and devout,
as in the days of old, as in years gone by. awaiting the consolation of Israel,
and the Holy Spirit was upon him.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. It had been revealed to him by the Holy Spirit
that he should not see death
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 24:7, 8, 9, 10) before he had seen the Christ of the Lord.
He came in the Spirit into the temple;
R. (8) Who is this king of glory? It is the Lord! and when the parents brought in the child Jesus
to perform the custom of the law in regard to him,
Lift up, O gates, your lintels; he took him into his arms and blessed God, saying:
reach up, you ancient portals,
that the king of glory may come in!—R. “Now, Master, you may let your servant go
in peace, according to your word,
Who is this king of glory? for my eyes have seen your salvation,
The LORD, strong and mighty, which you prepared in the sight of all the peoples:
the LORD, mighty in battle.—R. a light for revelation to the Gentiles,
and glory for your people Israel.” ]
Lift up, O gates, your lintels;
reach up, you ancient portals, The child’s father and mother were amazed at what was said about him;
that the king of glory may come in!—R. and Simeon blessed them and said to Mary his mother,
Behold, this child is destined
Who is this king of glory? for the fall and rise of many in Israel,
The LORD of hosts; he is the king of glory.—R. and to be a sign that will be contradicted
—and you yourself a sword will pierce—
SECOND READING (Heb 2:14-18) so that the thoughts of many hearts may be revealed.”
There was also a prophetess, Anna,
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews: the daughter of Phanuel, of the tribe of Asher.
She was advanced in years,
SINCE the children share in blood and flesh, having lived seven years with her husband after her marriage,
Jesus likewise shared in them, and then as a widow until she was eighty-four.
that through death he might destroy the one She never left the temple,
who has the power of death, that is, the Devil, but worshiped night and day with fasting and prayer.
and free those who through fear of death And coming forward at that very time,
had been subject to slavery all their life. she gave thanks to God and spoke about the child
Surely he did not help angels to all who were awaiting the redemption of Jerusalem.
but rather the descendants of Abraham;
therefore, he had to become like his brothers and sisters When they had fulfilled all the prescriptions
in every way, of the law of the Lord,
that he might be a merciful and faithful high priest before God they returned to Galilee, to their own town of Nazareth.
to expiate the sins of the people. The child grew and became strong, filled with wisdom;
Because he himself was tested through what he suffered, and the favor of God was upon him.
he is able to help those who are being tested.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 234 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS [ R. Alleluia, alleluia. ]
SAINT JOSEPH, HUSBAND OF MARY—ABC (March 19)
Blessed are those who dwell in your house, O Lord;
they never cease to praise you. [ —R. Alleluia, alleluia. ]
FIRST READING (2 Sam 7:4-5a, 12-14a, 16)
GOSPEL
A reading from the second Book of Samuel:
A (Mt 1:16, 18-21, 24a)
THE LORD spoke to Nathan and said:
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
“Go, tell my servant David,
‘When your time comes and you rest with your ancestors,
JACOB was the father of Joseph, the husband of Mary.
I will raise up your heir after you, sprung from your loins,
Of her was born Jesus who is called the Christ.
and I will make his kingdom firm.
It is he who shall build a house for my name.
Now this is how the birth of Jesus Christ came about.
And I will make his royal throne firm forever.
When his mother Mary was betrothed to Joseph,
I will be a father to him,
but before they lived together,
and he shall be a son to me.
she was found with child through the Holy Spirit.
Your house and your kingdom shall endure forever before me;
Joseph her husband, since he was a righteous man,
your throne shall stand firm forever.’”
yet unwilling to expose her to shame,
decided to divorce her quietly.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Such was his intention when, behold,
the angel of the Lord appeared to him in a dream and said,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 89:2-3, 4-5, 27 and 29)
“Joseph, son of David,
do not be afraid to take Mary your wife into your home.
R. (37) The son of David will live for ever.
For it is through the Holy Spirit
that this child has been conceived in her.
The promises of the LORD I will sing forever;
She will bear a son and you are to name him Jesus,
through all generations my mouth shall proclaim your faithfulness,
because he will save his people from their sins.”
For you have said, “My kindness is established forever”;
When Joseph awoke,
in heaven you have confirmed your faithfulness.—R.
he did as the angel of the Lord had commanded him
and took his wife into his home.
“I have made a covenant with my chosen one,
I have sworn to David my servant:
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ
Forever will I confirm your posterity
and establish your throne for all generations.”—R.
OR
“He shall say of me, ‘You are my father,
B (Lk 2:41-51a)
my God, the Rock, my savior.’
Forever I will maintain my kindness toward him,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke
and my covenant with him stands firm.”—R.
EACH year Jesus’ parents went to Jerusalem for the feast of Passover,
SECOND READING (Rom 4:13, 16-18, 22)
and when he was twelve years old,
they went up according to festival custom.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
After they had completed its days, as they were returning,
the boy Jesus remained behind in Jerusalem,
BROTHERS and sisters:
but his parents did not know it.
It was not through the law
Thinking that he was in the caravan,
that the promise was made to Abraham and his descendants
they journeyed for a day
that he would inherit the world,
and looked for him among their relatives and acquaintances,
but through the righteousness that comes from faith.
but not finding him,
For this reason, it depends on faith,
they returned to Jerusalem to look for him.
so that it may be a gift,
After three days they found him in the temple,
and the promise may be guaranteed to all his descendants,
sitting in the midst of the teachers,
not to those who only adhere to the law
listening to them and asking them questions,
but to those who follow the faith of Abraham,
and all who heard him were astounded
who is the father of all of us, as it is written,
at his understanding and his answers.
I have made you father of many nations.
When his parents saw him,
He is our father in the sight of God,
they were astonished,
in whom he believed, who gives life to the dead
and his mother said to him,
and calls into being what does not exist.
“Son, why have you done this to us?
He believed, hoping against hope,
Your father and I have been looking for you with great anxiety.”
that he would become the "father of many nations",
And he said to them,
according to what was said, "Thus shall your descendants be."
“Why were you looking for me?
That is why "it was credited to him as righteousness."
Did you not know that I must be in my Father’s house?”
But they did not understand what he said to them.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
He went down with them and came to Nazareth,
and was obedient to them.
ALLELUIA or VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (Psalm 84:5)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 235 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS By this “will,” we have been consecrated
ANNUNCIATION OF THE LORD—ABC (March 25) through the offering of the Body of Jesus Christ once for all.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Is 7:10-14; 8:10)
ALLELUIA or VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL (John 1:14ab)
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
[ R. Alleluia, alleluia. ]
THE LORD spoke to Ahaz, saying:
Ask for a sign from the LORD, your God; The Word of God became flesh and made his dwelling among us;
let it be deep as the nether world, or high as the sky! and we saw his glory. [ —R. Alleluia, alleluia. ]
But Ahaz answered,
“I will not ask! I will not tempt the LORD!” GOSPEL (Lk 1:26-38)
Then Isaiah said:
Listen, O house of David! + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
Is it not enough for you to weary people,
must you also weary my God? THE angel Gabriel was sent from God
Therefore the Lord himself will give you this sign: to a town of Galilee called Nazareth,
the virgin shall be with child, and bear a son, to a virgin betrothed to a man named Joseph,
and shall name him Emmanuel, of the house of David,
which means “God is with us!” and the virgin’s name was Mary.
And coming to her, he said,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. “Hail, full of grace! The Lord is with you.”
But she was greatly troubled at what was said
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 40:7-8a, 8b-9, 10, 11) and pondered what sort of greeting this might be.
Then the angel said to her,
R. (8a and 9a) Here I am, Lord; I come to do your will. “Do not be afraid, Mary,
for you have found favor with God.
Sacrifice or oblation you wished not, Behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son,
but ears open to obedience you gave me. and you shall name him Jesus.
Holocausts or sin-offerings you sought not; He will be great and will be called Son of the Most High,
then said I, “Behold I come.”—R. and the Lord God will give him the throne of David his father,
and he will rule over the house of Jacob forever,
“In the written scroll it is prescribed for me, and of his Kingdom there will be no end.”
To do your will, O my God, is my delight, But Mary said to the angel,
and your law is within my heart!”—R. “How can this be,
since I have no relations with a man?”
I announced your justice in the vast assembly; And the angel said to her in reply,
I did not restrain my lips, as you, O LORD, know.—R. “The Holy Spirit will come upon you,
and the power of the Most High will overshadow you.
Your justice I kept not hid within my heart; Therefore the child to be born
your faithfulness and your salvation I have spoken of; will be called holy, the Son of God.
I have made no secret of your kindness and your truth And behold, Elizabeth, your relative,
in the vast assembly.—R. has also conceived a son in her old age,
and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren;
SECOND READING (Heb 10:4-10) for nothing will be impossible for God.”
Mary said, “Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord.
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews: May it be done to me according to your word.”
Then the angel departed from her.
BROTHERS and sisters:
It is impossible that the blood of bulls and goats The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
take away sins.
For this reason, when Christ came into the world, he said:
“Sacrifice and offering you did not desire,
but a body you prepared for me;
in holocausts and sin offerings you took no delight.
Then I said, ‘As is written of me in the scroll,
behold, I come to do your will, O God.’”
First he says, “Sacrifices and offerings,
holocausts and sin offerings,
you neither desired nor delighted in.”
These are offered according to the law.
Then he says, “Behold, I come to do your will.”
He takes away the first to establish the second.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 236 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS to God who is, who was, and who is to come.—R.
HOLY TRINITY—A (Sunday after Pentecost)
GOSPEL (Jn 3:16-18)
FIRST READING (Ex 34:4b-6, 8-9) + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
A reading from the Book of Exodus: GOD so loved the world that he gave his only Son,
so that everyone who believes in him might not perish
EARLY in the morning Moses went up Mount Sinai but might have eternal life.
as the LORD had commanded him, For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world,
taking along the two stone tablets. but that the world might be saved through him.
Whoever believes in him will not be condemned,
Having come down in a cloud, the LORD stood with Moses there but whoever does not believe has already been condemned,
and proclaimed his name, "LORD." because he has not believed in the name of the only Son of God.
Thus the LORD passed before him and cried out,
"The LORD, the LORD, a merciful and gracious God, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
slow to anger and rich in kindness and fidelity."
Moses at once bowed down to the ground in worship.
Then he said, "If I find favor with you, O Lord,
do come along in our company.
This is indeed a stiff-necked people; yet pardon our wickedness and sins,
and receive us as your own."
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Dn 3:52, 53, 54, 55, 56)
R. (52b) Glory and praise for ever!
Blessed are you, O Lord, the God of our fathers,
praiseworthy and exalted above all forever;
And blessed is your holy and glorious name,
praiseworthy and exalted above all for all ages.—R.
Blessed are you in the temple of your holy glory,
praiseworthy and glorious above all forever.—R.
Blessed are you on the throne of your kingdom,
praiseworthy and exalted above all forever.—R.
Blessed are you who look into the depths
from your throne upon the cherubim,
praiseworthy and exalted above all forever.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Cor 13:11-13)
A reading from second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters, rejoice. Mend your ways,
encourage one another,
agree with one another, live in peace,
and the God of love and peace will be with you.
Greet one another with a holy kiss.
All the holy ones greet you.
The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ
and the love of God
and the fellowship of the Holy Spirit be with all of you.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
ALLELUIA (cf. Rev 1:8)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Glory to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 237 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS The Spirit himself bears witness with our spirit
HOLY TRINITY—B (Sunday after Pentecost) that we are children of God,
and if children, then heirs,
heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ,
FIRST READING (Deut 4:32-34, 39-40) if only we suffer with him
so that we may also be glorified with him.
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
MOSES said to the people:
"Ask now of the days of old, before your time, ALLELUIA (Rev 1:8)
ever since God created man upon the earth;
ask from one end of the sky to the other: R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Did anything so great ever happen before?
Was it ever heard of? Glory to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
Did a people ever hear the voice of God to God who is, who was, and who is to come.—R.
speaking from the midst of fire, as you did, and live?
Or did any god venture to go and take a nation for himself GOSPEL (Mt 28:16-20)
from the midst of another nation,
by testings, by signs and wonders, by war, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
with strong hand and outstretched arm, and by great terrors,
all of which the LORD, your God, THE eleven disciples went to Galilee,
did for you in Egypt before your very eyes? to the mountain to which Jesus had ordered them.
This is why you must now know, When they all saw him, they worshiped, but they doubted.
and fix in your heart, that the LORD is God Then Jesus approached and said to them,
in the heavens above and on earth below, "All power in heaven and on earth has been given to me.
and that there is no other. Go, therefore, and make disciples of all nations,
You must keep his statutes and commandments that I enjoin on you today, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
that you and your children after you may prosper, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit,
and that you may have long life on the land teaching them to observe all that I have commanded you.
which the LORD, your God, is giving you forever." And behold, I am with you always, until the end of the age."
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 33:4-5, 6, 9, 18-19, 20, 22)
R. (12b) Blessed the people the Lord has chosen to be his own.
Upright is the word of the LORD,
and all his works are trustworthy.
He loves justice and right;
of the kindness of the Lord the earth is full.—R.
By the word of the Lord the heavens were made;
by the breath of his mouth all their host.
For he spoke, and it was made;
he commanded, and it stood forth.—R.
See, the eyes of the Lord are upon those who fear him,
upon those who hope for his kindness,
To deliver them from death
and preserve them in spite of famine.—R.
Our soul waits for the Lord,
who is our help and our shield.
May your kindness, O Lord, be upon us
who have put our hope in you.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 8:14-17)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
For those who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.
For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear,
but you received a Spirit of adoption,
through whom we cry, "Abba, Father!"
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 238 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and proven character, hope,
HOLY TRINITY—C (Sunday after Pentecost) and hope does not disappoint,
because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts
through the Holy Spirit that has been given to us.
FIRST READING (Prv 8:22-31)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Book of Proverbs:
ALLELUIA (cf. Revelation 1:8)
THUS says the wisdom of God:
"The LORD possessed me, the beginning of his ways, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
the forerunner of his prodigies of long ago;
from of old I was poured forth, Glory to the Father, the Son, and the Holy Spirit;
at the first, before the earth. to God who is, who was, and who is to come.—R.
When there were no depths I was brought forth,
when there were no fountains or springs of water; GOSPEL (Jn 16:12-15)
before the mountains were settled into place,
before the hills, I was brought forth; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
while as yet the earth and fields were not made,
nor the first clods of the world. JESUS said to his disciples:
"I have much more to tell you, but you cannot bear it now.
"When the Lord established the heavens I was there, But when he comes, the Spirit of truth,
when he marked out the vault over the face of the deep; he will guide you to all truth.
when he made firm the skies above, He will not speak on his own,
when he fixed fast the foundations of the earth; but he will speak what he hears,
when he set for the sea its limit, and will declare to you the things that are coming.
so that the waters should not transgress his command; He will glorify me,
then was I beside him as his craftsman, because he will take from what is mine and declare it to you.
and I was his delight day by day, Everything that the Father has is mine;
playing before him all the while, for this reason I told you that he will take from what is mine
playing on the surface of his earth; and declare it to you."
and I found delight in the human race."
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 8:4-5, 6-7, 8-9)
R. (2a) O Lord, our God, how wonderful your name in all the earth!
When I behold your heavens, the work of your fingers,
the moon and the stars which you set in place—
What is man that you should be mindful of him,
or the son of man that you should care for him?—R.
You have made him little less than the angels,
and crowned him with glory and honor.
You have given him rule over the works of your hands,
putting all things under his feet:—R.
All sheep and oxen,
yes, and the beasts of the field,
The birds of the air, the fishes of the sea,
and whatever swims the paths of the seas.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 5:1-5)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Therefore, since we have been justified by faith,
we have peace with God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
through whom we have gained access by faith
to this grace in which we stand,
we boast in hope of the glory of God.
Not only that, but we even boast of our afflictions,
knowing that affliction produces endurance,
and endurance, proven character,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 239 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS for we all partake of the one loaf.
BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST—A
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
FIRST READING (Deut 8:2-3, 14b-16a) SEQUENCE Lauda Sion
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy: [ The sequence Laud may be sung optionally before the Alleluia. The
shorter form is indicated in brackets below. ]
MOSES said to the people:
"Remember how for forty years now the LORD, your God, Laud, O Zion, your salvation,
has directed all your journeying in the desert, Laud with hymns of exultation,
so as to test you by affliction Christ, your king and shepherd true:
and find out whether or not it was your intention
to keep his commandments. Bring him all the praise you know,
He therefore let you be afflicted with hunger, He is more than you bestow.
and then fed you with manna, Never can you reach his due.
a food unknown to you and your fathers,
in order to show you that not by bread alone does one live, Special theme for glad thanksgiving
but by every word that comes forth from the mouth of the LORD. Is the quick'ning and the living
Bread today before you set:
"Do not forget the LORD, your God,
who brought you out of the land of Egypt, From his hands of old partaken,
that place of slavery; As we know, by faith unshaken,
who guided you through the vast and terrible desert Where the Twelve at supper met.
with its saraph serpents and scorpions,
its parched and waterless ground; Full and clear ring out your chanting,
who brought forth water for you from the flinty rock Joy nor sweetest grace be wanting,
and fed you in the desert with manna, From your heart let praises burst:
a food unknown to your fathers."
For today the feast is holden,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. When the institution olden
Of that supper was rehearsed.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 147:12-13, 14-15, 19-20)
Here the new law's new oblation,
R. (12) Praise the Lord, Jerusalem. By the new king's revelation,
or: Ends the form of ancient rite:
R. Alleluia.
Now the new the old effaces,
Glorify the LORD, O Jerusalem; Truth away the shadow chases,
praise your God, O Zion. Light dispels the gloom of night.
For he has strengthened the bars of your gates;
he has blessed your children within you.—R. What he did at supper seated,
Christ ordained to be repeated,
He has granted peace in your borders; His memorial ne'er to cease:
with the best of wheat he fills you.
He sends forth his command to the earth; And his rule for guidance taking,
swiftly runs his word!—R. Bread and wine we hallow, making
Thus our sacrifice of peace.
He has proclaimed his word to Jacob,
his statutes and his ordinances to Israel. This the truth each Christian learns,
He has not done thus for any other nation; Bread into his flesh he turns,
his ordinances he has not made known to them. Alleluia.—R. To his precious blood the wine:
SECOND READING (1 Cor 10:16-17) Sight has fail'd, nor thought conceives,
But a dauntless faith believes,
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: Resting on a pow'r divine.
BROTHERS and sisters: Here beneath these signs are hidden
The cup of blessing that we bless, Priceless things to sense forbidden;
is it not a participation in the blood of Christ? Sign, not things are all we see:
The bread that we break,
is it not a participation in the body of Christ? Blood is poured and flesh is broken,
Because the loaf of bread is one, Yet in either wondrous token
we, though many, are one body, Christ entire we know to be.
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 240 ---
Whoso of this food partakes, and the bread that I will give
Does not rend the Lord nor breaks; is my flesh for the life of the world."
Christ is whole to all that tastes:
The Jews quarreled among themselves, saying,
Thousands are, as one, receivers, "How can this man give us his flesh to eat?"
One, as thousands of believers, Jesus said to them,
Eats of him who cannot waste. "Amen, amen, I say to you,
unless you eat the flesh of the Son of Man and drink his blood,
Bad and good the feast are sharing, you do not have life within you.
Of what divers dooms preparing, Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood
Endless death, or endless life. has eternal life,
and I will raise him on the last day.
Life to these, to those damnation, For my flesh is true food,
See how like participation and my blood is true drink.
Is with unlike issues rife. Whoever eats my flesh and drinks my blood
remains in me and I in him.
When the sacrament is broken, Just as the living Father sent me
Doubt not, but believe 'tis spoken, and I have life because of the Father,
That each sever'd outward token so also the one who feeds on me
doth the very whole contain. will have life because of me.
This is the bread that came down from heaven.
Nought the precious gift divides, Unlike your ancestors who ate and still died,
Breaking but the sign betides whoever eats this bread will live forever."
Jesus still the same abides,
still unbroken does remain. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
[ The shorter form of the sequence begins here: ]
[ Lo! the angel's food is given
To the pilgrim who has striven;
see the children's bread from heaven,
which on dogs may not be spent.
Truth the ancient types fulfilling,
Isaac bound, a victim willing,
Paschal lamb, its lifeblood spilling,
manna to the fathers sent.
Very bread, good shepherd, tend us,
Jesu, of your love befriend us,
You refresh us, you defend us,
Your eternal goodness send us
In the land of life to see.
You who all things can and know,
Who on earth such food bestow,
Grant us with your saints, though lowest,
Where the heav'nly feast you show,
Fellow heirs and guests to be. Amen. Alleluia. ]
ALLELUIA (John 6:51)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
I am the living bread that came down from heaven, says the Lord;
whoever eats this bread will live forever.—R.
GOSPEL (Jo 6:51-58)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
JESUS said to the Jewish crowds:
"I am the living bread that came down from heaven;
whoever eats this bread will live forever;
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 241 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and the sprinkling of a heifer's ashes
BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST—B can sanctify those who are defiled
so that their flesh is cleansed,
how much more will the blood of Christ,
FIRST READING (Ex 24:3-8) who through the eternal Spirit offered himself unblemished to God,
cleanse our consciences from dead works
A reading from the Book of Exodus: to worship the living God.
WHEN Moses came to the people For this reason he is mediator of a new covenant:
and related all the words and ordinances of the LORD, since a death has taken place for deliverance
they all answered with one voice, from transgressions under the first covenant,
"We will do everything that the LORD has told us." those who are called may receive the promised eternal inheritance.
Moses then wrote down all the words of the LORD and,
rising early the next day, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
he erected at the foot of the mountain an altar
and twelve pillars for the twelve tribes of Israel. SEQUENCE Lauda Sion
Then, having sent certain young men of the Israelites
to offer holocausts and sacrifice young bulls [ The sequence Laud may be sung optionally before the Alleluia. The
as peace offerings to the LORD, shorter form is indicated in brackets below. ]
Moses took half of the blood and put it in large bowls;
the other half he splashed on the altar. Laud, O Zion, your salvation,
Taking the book of the covenant, he read it aloud to the people, Laud with hymns of exultation,
who answered, "All that the LORD has said, we will heed and do." Christ, your king and shepherd true:
Then he took the blood and sprinkled it on the people, saying,
"This is the blood of the covenant Bring him all the praise you know,
that the LORD has made with you He is more than you bestow.
in accordance with all these words of his." Never can you reach his due.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Special theme for glad thanksgiving
Is the quick'ning and the living
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 116:12-13, 15-16, 17-18) Bread today before you set:
R. (13) I will take the cup of salvation, and call on the name of the Lord. From his hands of old partaken,
or: As we know, by faith unshaken,
R. Alleluia. Where the Twelve at supper met.
How shall I make a return to the LORD Full and clear ring out your chanting,
for all the good he has done for me? Joy nor sweetest grace be wanting,
The cup of salvation I will take up, From your heart let praises burst:
and I will call upon the name of the LORD.—R.
For today the feast is holden,
Precious in the eyes of the LORD When the institution olden
is the death of his faithful ones. Of that supper was rehearsed.
I am your servant, the son of your handmaid;
you have loosed my bonds.—R. Here the new law's new oblation,
By the new king's revelation,
To you will I offer sacrifice of thanksgiving, Ends the form of ancient rite:
and I will call upon the name of the LORD.
My vows to the LORD I will pay Now the new the old effaces,
in the presence of all his people.—R. Truth away the shadow chases,
Light dispels the gloom of night.
SECOND READING (Heb 9:11-15)
What he did at supper seated,
A reading from the Letter to the Hebrews: Christ ordained to be repeated,
His memorial ne'er to cease:
BROTHERS and sisters:
When Christ came as high priest And his rule for guidance taking,
of the good things that have come to be, Bread and wine we hallow, making
passing through the greater and more perfect tabernacle Thus our sacrifice of peace.
not made by hands, that is, not belonging to this creation,
he entered once for all into the sanctuary, This the truth each Christian learns,
not with the blood of goats and calves Bread into his flesh he turns,
but with his own blood, thus obtaining eternal redemption. To his precious blood the wine:
For if the blood of goats and bulls
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 242 ---
Sight has fail'd, nor thought conceives, ALLELUIA (John 6:51)
But a dauntless faith believes,
Resting on a pow'r divine. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Here beneath these signs are hidden I am the living bread that came down from heaven,
Priceless things to sense forbidden; says the Lord; whoever eats this bread will live forever.—R.
sign, not things are all we see:
GOSPEL (Mk 14:12-16, 22-26)
Blood is poured and flesh is broken,
Yet in either wondrous token + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
Christ entire we know to be.
ON the first day of the Feast of Unleavened Bread,
Whoso of this food partakes, when they sacrificed the Passover lamb,
Does not rend the Lord nor breaks; Jesus' disciples said to him,
Christ is whole to all that tastes: "Where do you want us to go
and prepare for you to eat the Passover?"
Thousands are, as one, receivers, He sent two of his disciples and said to them,
One, as thousands of believers, "Go into the city and a man will meet you,
Eats of him who cannot waste. carrying a jar of water.
Follow him.
Bad and good the feast are sharing, Wherever he enters, say to the master of the house,
Of what divers dooms preparing, 'The Teacher says, "Where is my guest room
Endless death, or endless life. where I may eat the Passover with my disciples?"'
Then he will show you a large upper room furnished and ready.
Life to these, to those damnation, Make the preparations for us there."
See how like participation The disciples then went off, entered the city,
Is with unlike issues rife. and found it just as he had told them;
and they prepared the Passover.
When the sacrament is broken,
Doubt not, but believe 'tis spoken, While they were eating,
That each sever'd outward token he took bread, said the blessing,
doth the very whole contain. broke it, gave it to them, and said,
"Take it; this is my body."
Nought the precious gift divides, Then he took a cup, gave thanks, and gave it to them,
Breaking but the sign betides and they all drank from it.
Jesus still the same abides, He said to them,
still unbroken does remain. "This is my blood of the covenant,
which will be shed for many.
[ The shorter form of the sequence begins here: ] Amen, I say to you,
I shall not drink again the fruit of the vine
[ Lo! the angel's food is given until the day when I drink it new in the kingdom of God."
To the pilgrim who has striven; Then, after singing a hymn,
see the children's bread from heaven, they went out to the Mount of Olives.
which on dogs may not be spent.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Truth the ancient types fulfilling,
Isaac bound, a victim willing,
Paschal lamb, its lifeblood spilling,
manna to the fathers sent.
Very bread, good shepherd, tend us,
Jesu, of your love befriend us,
You refresh us, you defend us,
Your eternal goodness send us
In the land of life to see.
You who all things can and know,
Who on earth such food bestow,
Grant us with your saints, though lowest,
Where the heav'nly feast you show,
Fellow heirs and guests to be. Amen. Alleluia. ]
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 243 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS He is more than you bestow.
BODY AND BLOOD OF CHRIST—C Never can you reach his due.
Special theme for glad thanksgiving
FIRST READING (Gn 14:18-20) Is the quick'ning and the living
Bread today before you set:
A reading from the Book of Genesis:
From his hands of old partaken,
IN those days, Melchizedek, king of Salem, brought out bread and wine, As we know, by faith unshaken,
and being a priest of God Most High, Where the Twelve at supper met.
he blessed Abram with these words:
"Blessed be Abram by God Most High, Full and clear ring out your chanting,
the creator of heaven and earth; Joy nor sweetest grace be wanting,
and blessed be God Most High, From your heart let praises burst:
who delivered your foes into your hand."
Then Abram gave him a tenth of everything. For today the feast is holden,
When the institution olden
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Of that supper was rehearsed.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 110:1, 2, 3, 4) Here the new law's new oblation,
By the new king's revelation,
R. (4b) You are a priest for ever, in the line of Melchizedek. Ends the form of ancient rite:
The LORD said to my Lord: "Sit at my right hand Now the new the old effaces,
till I make your enemies your footstool."—R. Truth away the shadow chases,
Light dispels the gloom of night.
The scepter of your power the LORD will stretch forth from Zion:
"Rule in the midst of your enemies."—R. What he did at supper seated,
Christ ordained to be repeated,
"Yours is princely power in the day of your birth, in holy splendor; His memorial ne'er to cease:
before the daystar, like the dew, I have begotten you."—R.
And his rule for guidance taking,
The LORD has sworn, and he will not repent: Bread and wine we hallow, making
"You are a priest forever, according to the order of Thus our sacrifice of peace.
Melchizedek."—R.
This the truth each Christian learns,
SECOND READING (1 Cor 11:23-26) Bread into his flesh he turns,
To his precious blood the wine:
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
Sight has fail'd, nor thought conceives,
BROTHERS and sisters: But a dauntless faith believes,
I received from the Lord what I also handed on to you, Resting on a pow'r divine.
that the Lord Jesus, on the night he was handed over,
took bread, and, after he had given thanks, Here beneath these signs are hidden
broke it and said, "This is my body that is for you. Priceless things to sense forbidden;
Do this in remembrance of me." Sign, not things are all we see:
In the same way also the cup, after supper, saying,
"This cup is the new covenant in my blood. Blood is poured and flesh is broken,
Do this, as often as you drink it, in remembrance of me." Yet in either wondrous token
For as often as you eat this bread and drink the cup, Christ entire we know to be.
you proclaim the death of the Lord until he comes.
Whoso of this food partakes,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Does not rend the Lord nor breaks;
Christ is whole to all that tastes:
SEQUENCE Lauda Sion
Thousands are, as one, receivers,
[ The sequence Laud may be sung optionally before the Alleluia. The One, as thousands of believers,
shorter form is indicated in brackets below. ] Eats of him who cannot waste.
Laud, O Zion, your salvation, Bad and good the feast are sharing,
Laud with hymns of exultation, Of what divers dooms preparing,
Christ, your king and shepherd true: Endless death, or endless life.
Bring him all the praise you know, Life to these, to those damnation,
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 244 ---
See how like participation and looking up to heaven,
Is with unlike issues rife. he said the blessing over them, broke them,
and gave them to the disciples to set before the crowd.
When the sacrament is broken, They all ate and were satisfied.
Doubt not, but believe 'tis spoken, And when the leftover fragments were picked up,
That each sever'd outward token they filled twelve wicker baskets.
doth the very whole contain.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Nought the precious gift divides,
Breaking but the sign betides
Jesus still the same abides,
still unbroken does remain.
[ The shorter form of the sequence begins here: ]
[ Lo! the angel's food is given
To the pilgrim who has striven;
See the children's bread from heaven,
which on dogs may not be spent.
Truth the ancient types fulfilling,
Isaac bound, a victim willing,
Paschal lamb, its lifeblood spilling,
manna to the fathers sent.
Very bread, good shepherd, tend us,
Jesu, of your love befriend us,
You refresh us, you defend us,
Your eternal goodness send us
In the land of life to see.
You who all things can and know,
Who on earth such food bestow,
Grant us with your saints, though lowest,
Where the heav'nly feast you show,
Fellow heirs and guests to be. Amen. Alleluia. ]
ALLELUIA (John 6:51)
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
I am the living bread that came down from heaven,
says the Lord; whoever eats this bread will live forever.—R.
GOSPEL (Lk 9:11b-17)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
JESUS spoke to the crowds about the kingdom of God,
and he healed those who needed to be cured.
As the day was drawing to a close,
the Twelve approached him and said,
"Dismiss the crowd
so that they can go to the surrounding villages and farms
and find lodging and provisions;
for we are in a deserted place here."
He said to them, "Give them some food yourselves."
They replied, "Five loaves and two fish are all we have,
unless we ourselves go and buy food for all these people."
Now the men there numbered about five thousand.
Then he said to his disciples,
"Have them sit down in groups of about fifty."
They did so and made them all sit down.
Then taking the five loaves and the two fish,
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 245 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Beloved, if God so loved us,
SACRED HEART OF JESUS—A (Friday after Corpus Christi) we also must love one another.
No one has ever seen God.
Yet, if we love one another, God remains in us,
FIRST READING (Deut 7:6-11) and his love is brought to perfection in us.
A reading from the Book of Deuteronomy: This is how we know that we remain in him and he in us,
that he has given us of his Spirit.
MOSES said to the people: Moreover, we have seen and testify
"You are a people sacred to the LORD, your God; that the Father sent his Son as savior of the world.
he has chosen you from all the nations on the face of the earth Whoever acknowledges that Jesus is the Son of God,
to be a people peculiarly his own. God remains in him and he in God.
It was not because you are the largest of all nations We have come to know and to believe in the love God has for us.
that the LORD set his heart on you and chose you,
for you are really the smallest of all nations. God is love, and whoever remains in love
It was because the LORD loved you remains in God and God in him.
and because of his fidelity to the oath he had sworn
your fathers, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
that he brought you out with his strong hand
from the place of slavery, ALLELUIA (Matthew 11:29ab)
and ransomed you from the hand of Pharaoh, king of Egypt.
Understand, then, that the LORD, your God, is God indeed, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
the faithful God who keeps his merciful covenant
down to the thousandth generation Take my yoke upon you, says the Lord;
toward those who love him and keep his commandments, and learn from me, for I am meek and humble of heart.—R.
but who repays with destruction a person who hates him;
he does not dally with such a one, GOSPEL (Mt 11:25-30)
but makes them personally pay for it.
You shall therefore carefully observe the commandments, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
the statutes and the decrees that I enjoin on you today."
AT that time Jesus exclaimed:
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. "I give praise to you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
for although you have hidden these things
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 103:1-2, 3-4, 6-7, 8, 10) from the wise and the learned
you have revealed them to little ones.
R. (cf. 17) The Lord's kindness is everlasting to those who fear him. Yes, Father, such has been your gracious will.
All things have been handed over to me by my Father.
Bless the LORD, O my soul; No one knows the Son except the Father,
all my being, bless his holy name. and no one knows the Father except the Son
Bless the LORD, O my soul; and anyone to whom the Son wishes to reveal him."
and forget not all his benefits.—R.
"Come to me, all you who labor and are burdened,
He pardons all your iniquities, and I will give you rest.
heals all your ills. Take my yoke upon you and learn from me,
He redeems your life from destruction, for I am meek and humble of heart;
crowns you with kindness and compassion.—R. and you will find rest for yourselves.
For my yoke is easy, and my burden light."
Merciful and gracious is the Lord,
slow to anger and abounding in kindness. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Not according to our sins does he deal with us,
nor does he requite us according to our crimes.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Jn 4:7-16)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint John:
BELOVED, let us love one another,
because love is of God;
everyone who loves is begotten by God and knows God.
Whoever is without love does not know God, for God is love.
In this way the love of God was revealed to us:
God sent his only Son into the world
so that we might have life through him.
In this is love:
not that we have loved God, but that he loved us
and sent his Son as expiation for our sins.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 246 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS and confidence of access through faith in him.
SACRED HEART OF JESUS—B (Friday after Corpus Christi)
For this reason I kneel before the Father,
from whom every family in heaven and on earth is named,
FIRST READING (Hos 11:1, 3-4, 8c-9) that he may grant you in accord with the riches of his glory
to be strengthened with power through his Spirit in the inner self,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Hosea: and that Christ may dwell in your hearts through faith;
that you, rooted and grounded in love,
THUS says the LORD: may have strength to comprehend with all the holy ones
When Israel was a child I loved him, what is the breadth and length and height and depth,
out of Egypt I called my son. and to know the love of Christ which surpasses knowledge,
Yet it was I who taught Ephraim to walk, so that you may be filled with all the fullness of God.
who took them in my arms;
I drew them with human cords, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
with bands of love;
I fostered them like one ALLELUIA
who raises an infant to his cheeks;
Yet, though I stooped to feed my child, A (Matthew 11:29ab)
they did not know that I was their healer.
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
My heart is overwhelmed,
my pity is stirred. Take my yoke upon you, says the Lord;
I will not give vent to my blazing anger, and learn from me, for I am meek and humble of heart.—R.
I will not destroy Ephraim again;
For I am God and not a man, OR
the Holy One present among you;
I will not let the flames consume you. B (1 Jn 4:10b)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Is 12:2-3, 4, 5-6) God first loved us
and sent his Son as expiation for our sins.—R.
R. (3) You will draw water joyfully from the springs of salvation.
GOSPEL (Jn 19:31-37)
God indeed is my savior;
I am confident and unafraid. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
My strength and my courage is the LORD,
and he has been my savior. SINCE it was preparation day,
With joy you will draw water in order that the bodies might not remain
at the fountain of salvation.—R. on the cross on the sabbath,
for the sabbath day of that week was a solemn one,
Give thanks to the LORD, acclaim his name; the Jews asked Pilate that their legs be broken
among the nations make known his deeds, and they be taken down.
proclaim how exalted is his name.—R. So the soldiers came and broke the legs of the first
and then of the other one who was crucified with Jesus.
Sing praise to the LORD for his glorious achievement; But when they came to Jesus and saw that he was already dead,
let this be known throughout all the earth. they did not break his legs,
Shout with exultation, O city of Zion, but one soldier thrust his lance into his side,
for great in your midst and immediately blood and water flowed out.
is the Holy One of Israel!—R. An eyewitness has testified, and his testimony is true;
he knows that he is speaking the truth,
SECOND READING (Eph 3:8-12, 14-19) so that you also may come to believe.
For this happened so that the Scripture passage might be fulfilled:
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians: Not a bone of it will be broken.
And again another passage says:
BROTHERS and sisters: They will look upon him whom they have pierced.
To me, the very least of all the holy ones, this grace was given,
to preach to the Gentiles the inscrutable riches of Christ, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and to bring to light for all what is the plan of the mystery
hidden from ages past in God who created all things,
so that the manifold wisdom of God
might now be made known through the church
to the principalities and authorities in the heavens.
This was according to the eternal purpose
that he accomplished in Christ Jesus our Lord,
in whom we have boldness of speech
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 247 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS BROTHERS and sisters:
SACRED HEART OF JESUS—C (Friday after Corpus Christi) The love of God has been poured out into our hearts
through the Holy Spirit that has been given to us.
For Christ, while we were still helpless,
FIRST READING (Ez 34:11-16) died at the appointed time for the ungodly.
Indeed, only with difficulty does one die for a just person,
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel: though perhaps for a good person
one might even find courage to die.
THUS says the Lord GOD: But God proves his love for us
I myself will look after and tend my sheep. in that while we were still sinners Christ died for us.
As a shepherd tends his flock How much more then, since we are now justified by his blood,
when he finds himself among his scattered sheep, will we be saved through him from the wrath.
so will I tend my sheep. Indeed, if, while we were enemies,
I will rescue them from every place where they were scattered we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son,
when it was cloudy and dark. how much more, once reconciled,
I will lead them out from among the peoples will we be saved by his life.
and gather them from the foreign lands; Not only that,
I will bring them back to their own country but we also boast of God through our Lord Jesus Christ,
and pasture them upon the mountains of Israel through whom we have now received reconciliation.
in the land's ravines and all its inhabited places.
In good pastures will I pasture them, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and on the mountain heights of Israel
shall be their grazing ground. ALLELUIA
There they shall lie down on good grazing ground,
and in rich pastures shall they be pastured A (Matthew 11:29ab)
on the mountains of Israel.
I myself will pasture my sheep; R. Alleluia, alleluia.
I myself will give them rest, says the Lord GOD.
The lost I will seek out, Take my yoke upon you, says the Lord,
the strayed I will bring back, and learn from me, for I am meek and humble of heart.—R.
the injured I will bind up,
the sick I will heal, OR
but the sleek and the strong I will destroy,
shepherding them rightly. B (John 10:14)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 23:1-3a, 3b-4, 5, 6) I am the good shepherd, says the Lord,
I know my sheep, and mine know me.—R.
R. (1) The Lord is my shepherd; there is nothing I shall want.
GOSPEL (Lk 15:3-7)
The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want.
In verdant pastures he gives me repose; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
beside restful waters he leads me;
he refreshes my soul.—R. JESUS addressed this parable to the Pharisees and scribes:
"What man among you having a hundred sheep and losing
He guides me in right paths one of them
for his name's sake. would not leave the ninety-nine in the desert
Even though I walk in the dark valley and go after the lost one until he finds it?
I fear no evil; for you are at my side And when he does find it,
with your rod and your staff he sets it on his shoulders with great joy
that give me courage.—R. and, upon his arrival home,
he calls together his friends and neighbors and says to them,
You spread the table before me 'Rejoice with me because I have found my lost sheep.'
in the sight of my foes; I tell you, in just the same way
you anoint my head with oil; there will be more joy in heaven over one sinner who repents
my cup overflows.—R. than over ninety-nine righteous people
who have no need of repentance."
Only goodness and kindness follow me
all the days of my life; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD
for years to come.—R.
SECOND READING (Rom 5:5b-11)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 248 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS as you attain the goal of your faith, the salvation of your souls.
NATIVITY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST (VIGIL)—ABC (June 24)
Concerning this salvation,
prophets who prophesied about the grace that was to be yours
FIRST READING (Jer 1:4-10) searched and investigated it,
investigating the time and circumstances
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Jeremiah: that the Spirit of Christ within them indicated
when he testified in advance
IN the days of King Josiah, the word of the LORD came to me, saying: to the sufferings destined for Christ
and the glories to follow them.
Before I formed you in the womb I knew you, It was revealed to them that they were serving not themselves but you
before you were born I dedicated you, with regard to the things that have now been announced to you
a prophet to the nations I appointed you. by those who preached the Good News to you
through the Holy Spirit sent from heaven,
“Ah, Lord GOD!” I said, things into which angels longed to look.
“I know not how to speak; I am too young.”
But the LORD answered me, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Say not, “I am too young.”
To whomever I send you, you shall go; ALLELUIA (See John 1:7; Luke 1:17)
whatever I command you, you shall speak.
Have no fear before them, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
because I am with you to deliver you, says the LORD.
He came to testify to the light,
Then the LORD extended his hand and touched my mouth, saying, to prepare a people fit for the Lord.—R.
See, I place my words in your mouth! GOSPEL (Lk 1:5-17)
This day I set you
over nations and over kingdoms, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
to root up and to tear down,
to destroy and to demolish, IN the days of Herod, King of Judea,
to build and to plant. there was a priest named Zechariah
of the priestly division of Abijah;
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. his wife was from the daughters of Aaron,
and her name was Elizabeth.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 71:1-2, 3-4a, 5-6ab, 15ab and 17) Both were righteous in the eyes of God,
observing all the commandments
R. (6) Since my mother’s womb, you have been my strength. and ordinances of the Lord blamelessly.
But they had no child, because Elizabeth was barren
In you, O LORD, I take refuge; and both were advanced in years.
let me never be put to shame. Once when he was serving
In your justice rescue me, and deliver me; as priest in his division’s turn before God,
incline your ear to me, and save me.—R. according to the practice of the priestly service,
he was chosen by lot
Be my rock of refuge, to enter the sanctuary of the Lord to burn incense.
a stronghold to give me safety, Then, when the whole assembly of the people was praying outside
for you are my rock and my fortress. at the hour of the incense offering,
O my God, rescue me from the hand of the wicked.—R. the angel of the Lord appeared to him,
standing at the right of the altar of incense.
For you are my hope, O LORD; Zechariah was troubled by what he saw, and fear came upon him.
my trust, O LORD, from my youth. But the angel said to him, “Do not be afraid, Zechariah,
On you I depend from birth; because your prayer has been heard.
from my mother’s womb you are my strength.—R. Your wife Elizabeth will bear you a son,
and you shall name him John.
My mouth shall declare your justice, And you will have joy and gladness,
day by day your salvation. and many will rejoice at his birth,
O God, you have taught me from my youth, for he will be great in the sight of the Lord.
and till the present I proclaim your wondrous deeds.—R. John will drink neither wine nor strong drink.
He will be filled with the Holy Spirit even from his mother’s womb,
SECOND READING (1 Pt 1:8-12) and he will turn many of the children of Israel
to the Lord their God.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Peter: He will go before him in the spirit and power of Elijah
to turn their hearts toward their children
BELOVED: and the disobedient to the understanding of the righteous,
Although you have not seen Jesus Christ you love him; to prepare a people fit for the Lord.”
even though you do not see him now yet believe in him,
you rejoice with an indescribable and glorious joy, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 249 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS From this man’s descendants God, according to his promise,
NATIVITY OF JOHN THE BAPTIST (DAY)—ABC (June 24) has brought to Israel a savior, Jesus.
John heralded his coming by proclaiming a baptism of repentance
to all the people of Israel;
FIRST READING (Is 49:1-6) and as John was completing his course, he would say,
‘What do you suppose that I am? I am not he.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah: Behold, one is coming after me;
I am not worthy to unfasten the sandals of his feet.’
HEAR me, O coastlands,
listen, O distant peoples. “My brothers, sons of the family of Abraham,
The LORD called me from birth, and those others among you who are God-fearing,
from my mother’s womb he gave me my name. to us this word of salvation has been sent.”
He made of me a sharp-edged sword
and concealed me in the shadow of his arm. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
He made me a polished arrow,
in his quiver he hid me. ALLELUIA (See Luke 1:76)
You are my servant, he said to me,
Israel, through whom I show my glory. R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Though I thought I had toiled in vain, You, child, will be called prophet of the Most High,
and for nothing, uselessly, spent my strength, for you will go before the Lord to prepare his way.—R.
yet my reward is with the LORD,
my recompense is with my God. GOSPEL (Lk 1:57-66, 80)
For now the LORD has spoken
who formed me as his servant from the womb, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
that Jacob may be brought back to him
and Israel gathered to him; WHEN the time arrived for Elizabeth to have her child
and I am made glorious in the sight of the LORD, she gave birth to a son.
and my God is now my strength! Her neighbors and relatives heard
It is too little, he says, for you to be my servant, that the Lord had shown his great mercy toward her,
to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and they rejoiced with her.
and restore the survivors of Israel; When they came on the eighth day to circumcise the child,
I will make you a light to the nations, they were going to call him Zechariah after his father,
that my salvation may reach to the ends of the earth. but his mother said in reply,
“No. He will be called John.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. But they answered her,
“There is no one among your relatives who has this name.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 139:1b-3, 13-14ab, 14c-15) So they made signs, asking his father what he wished him to be called.
He asked for a tablet and wrote, “John is his name,”
R. (14) I praise you, for I am wonderfully made. and all were amazed.
Immediately his mouth was opened, his tongue freed,
O LORD, you have probed me, you know me: and he spoke blessing God.
you know when I sit and when I stand; Then fear came upon all their neighbors,
you understand my thoughts from afar. and all these matters were discussed
My journeys and my rest you scrutinize, throughout the hill country of Judea.
with all my ways you are familiar.—R. All who heard these things took them to heart, saying,
“What, then, will this child be?”
Truly you have formed my inmost being; For surely the hand of the Lord was with him.
you knit me in my mother’s womb.
I give you thanks that I am fearfully, wonderfully made; The child grew and became strong in spirit,
wonderful are your works.—R. and he was in the desert until the day
of his manifestation to Israel.
My soul also you knew full well;
nor was my frame unknown to you The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
When I was made in secret,
when I was fashioned in the depths of the earth.—R.
SECOND READING (Acts 13:22-26)
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles:
IN those days, Paul said:
“God raised up David as king;
of him God testified,
I have found David, son of Jesse, a man after my own heart;
he will carry out my every wish.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 250 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS I did not immediately consult flesh and blood,
SS. PETER AND PAUL, APOSTLES (VIGIL)—ABC (June 29) nor did I go up to Jerusalem
to those who were Apostles before me;
rather, I went into Arabia and then returned to Damascus.
FIRST READING (Acts 3:1-10)
Then after three years I went up to Jerusalem
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: to confer with Cephas and remained with him for fifteen days.
But I did not see any other of the Apostles,
PETER and John were going up to the temple area only James the brother of the Lord.
for the three o’clock hour of prayer. —As to what I am writing to you, behold,
And a man crippled from birth was carried before God, I am not lying.
and placed at the gate of the temple called “the Beautiful Gate”
every day to beg for alms from the people who entered the temple. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
When he saw Peter and John about to go into the temple,
he asked for alms. ALLELUIA (John 21:17)
But Peter looked intently at him, as did John,
and said, “Look at us.” R. Alleluia, alleluia.
He paid attention to them, expecting to receive something from them.
Peter said, “I have neither silver nor gold, Lord, you know everything:
but what I do have I give you: you know that I love you.—R.
in the name of Jesus Christ the Nazorean, rise and walk.”
Then Peter took him by the right hand and raised him up, GOSPEL (Jn 21:15-19)
and immediately his feet and ankles grew strong.
He leaped up, stood, and walked around, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
and went into the temple with them,
walking and jumping and praising God. JESUS had revealed himself to his disciples
When all the people saw the man walking and praising God, and, when they had finished breakfast, said to Simon Peter,
they recognized him as the one who used to sit begging “Simon, son of John, do you love me more than these?”
at the Beautiful Gate of the temple, Simon Peter answered him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.”
and they were filled with amazement and astonishment Jesus said to him, “Feed my lambs.”
at what had happened to him. He then said to Simon Peter a second time,
“Simon, son of John, do you love me?”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Simon Peter answered him, “Yes, Lord, you know that I love you.”
He said to him, “Tend my sheep.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 19:2-3, 4-5) He said to him the third time,
“Simon, son of John, do you love me?”
R. (5) Their message goes out through all the earth. Peter was distressed that he had said to him a third time,
“Do you love me?” and he said to him,
The heavens declare the glory of God; “Lord, you know everything; you know that I love you.”
and the firmament proclaims his handiwork. Jesus said to him, “Feed my sheep.
Day pours out the word to day; Amen, amen, I say to you, when you were younger,
and night to night imparts knowledge.—R. you used to dress yourself and go where you wanted;
but when you grow old, you will stretch out your hands,
Not a word nor a discourse and someone else will dress you
whose voice is not heard; and lead you where you do not want to go.”
through all the earth their voice resounds, He said this signifying by what kind of death he would glorify God.
and to the ends of the world, their message.—R. And when he had said this, he said to him, “Follow me.”
SECOND READING (Gal 1:11-20) The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Galatians:
I WANT you to know, brothers and sisters,
that the Gospel preached by me is not of human origin.
For I did not receive it from a human being, nor was I taught it,
but it came through a revelation of Jesus Christ.
For you heard of my former way of life in Judaism,
how I persecuted the Church of God beyond measure
and tried to destroy it, and progressed in Judaism
beyond many of my contemporaries among my race,
since I was even more a zealot for my ancestral traditions.
But when God, who from my mother’s womb had set me apart
and called me through his grace,
was pleased to reveal his Son to me,
so that I might proclaim him to the Gentiles,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 251 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS blessed the man who takes refuge in him.—R.
SS. PETER AND PAUL (DAY)—ABC (June 29)
SECOND READING (2 Tm 4:6-8, 17-18)
FIRST READING (Acts 12:1-11) A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy:
A reading from the Acts of the Apostles: I, PAUL, am already being poured out like a libation,
and the time of my departure is at hand.
IN those days, King Herod laid hands upon some members of the Church I have competed well; I have finished the race;
to harm them. I have kept the faith.
He had James, the brother of John, killed by the sword, From now on the crown of righteousness awaits me,
and when he saw that this was pleasing to the Jews which the Lord, the just judge,
he proceeded to arrest Peter also. will award to me on that day, and not only to me,
—It was the feast of Unleavened Bread.— but to all who have longed for his appearance.
He had him taken into custody and put in prison
under the guard of four squads of four soldiers each. The Lord stood by me and gave me strength,
He intended to bring him before the people after Passover. so that through me the proclamation might be completed
Peter thus was being kept in prison, and all the Gentiles might hear it.
but prayer by the Church was fervently being made And I was rescued from the lion’s mouth.
to God on his behalf. The Lord will rescue me from every evil threat
and will bring me safe to his heavenly Kingdom.
On the very night before Herod was to bring him to trial, To him be glory forever and ever. Amen.
Peter, secured by double chains,
was sleeping between two soldiers, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
while outside the door guards kept watch on the prison.
Suddenly the angel of the Lord stood by him ALLELUIA (Matthew 16:18)
and a light shone in the cell.
He tapped Peter on the side and awakened him, saying, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
“Get up quickly.”
The chains fell from his wrists. You are Peter and upon this rock I will build my Church,
The angel said to him, “Put on your belt and your sandals.” and the gates of the netherworld shall not prevail against it.—R.
He did so.
Then he said to him, “Put on your cloak and follow me.” GOSPEL (Mt 16:13-19)
So he followed him out,
not realizing that what was happening through the angel was real; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
he thought he was seeing a vision.
They passed the first guard, then the second, WHEN Jesus went into the region of Caesarea Philippi
and came to the iron gate leading out to the city, he asked his disciples,
which opened for them by itself. “Who do people say that the Son of Man is?”
They emerged and made their way down an alley, They replied, “Some say John the Baptist, others Elijah,
and suddenly the angel left him. still others Jeremiah or one of the prophets.”
He said to them, “But who do you say that I am?”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Simon Peter said in reply,
“You are the Christ, the Son of the living God.”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 34:2-3, 4-5, 6-7, 8-9) Jesus said to him in reply, “Blessed are you, Simon son of Jonah.
For flesh and blood has not revealed this to you, but my heavenly Father.
R. (5) The angel of the Lord will rescue those who fear him. And so I say to you, you are Peter,
and upon this rock I will build my Church,
I will bless the LORD at all times; and the gates of the netherworld shall not prevail against it.
his praise shall be ever in my mouth. I will give you the keys to the Kingdom of heaven.
Let my soul glory in the LORD; Whatever you bind on earth shall be bound in heaven;
the lowly will hear me and be glad.—R. and whatever you loose on earth shall be loosed in heaven.”
Glorify the LORD with me, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
let us together extol his name.
I sought the LORD, and he answered me
and delivered me from all my fears.—R.
Look to him that you may be radiant with joy,
and your faces may not blush with shame.
When the poor one called out, the LORD heard,
and from all his distress he saved him.—R.
The angel of the LORD encamps
around those who fear him, and delivers them.
Taste and see how good the LORD is;
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 252 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS while we were with him on the holy mountain.
TRANSFIGURATION OF THE LORD—A (August 6) Moreover, we possess the prophetic message that is altogether reliable.
You will do well to be attentive to it,
as to a lamp shining in a dark place,
FIRST READING (Dn 7:9-10, 13-14) until day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Daniel The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
AS I watched: ALLELUIA (Matthew 17:5c)
Thrones were set up R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and the Ancient One took his throne.
His clothing was bright as snow, This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased;
and the hair on his head as white as wool; listen to him.—R.
his throne was flames of fire,
with wheels of burning fire. GOSPEL (Mt 17:1-9)
A surging stream of fire
flowed out from where he sat; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
thousands upon thousands were ministering to him,
and myriads upon myriads attended him. JESUS took Peter, James, and his brother, John,
The court was convened and the books were opened. and led them up a high mountain by themselves.
And he was transfigured before them;
As the visions during the night continued, I saw: his face shone like the sun
and his clothes became white as light.
One like a Son of man coming, And behold, Moses and Elijah appeared to them,
on the clouds of heaven; conversing with him.
When he reached the Ancient One Then Peter said to Jesus in reply,
and was presented before him, “Lord, it is good that we are here.
The one like a Son of man received dominion, glory, and kingship; If you wish, I will make three tents here,
all peoples, nations, and languages serve him. one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
His dominion is an everlasting dominion While he was still speaking, behold,
that shall not be taken away, a bright cloud cast a shadow over them,
his kingship shall not be destroyed. then from the cloud came a voice that said,
“This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased;
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. listen to him.”
When the disciples heard this, they fell prostrate
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 97:1-2, 5-6, 9) and were very much afraid.
But Jesus came and touched them, saying,
R. (1a and 9a) The Lord is king, the Most High over all the earth. “Rise, and do not be afraid.”
And when the disciples raised their eyes,
The LORD is king; let the earth rejoice; they saw no one else but Jesus alone.
let the many islands be glad.
Clouds and darkness are round about him, As they were coming down from the mountain,
justice and judgment are the foundation of his throne.—R. Jesus charged them,
“Do not tell the vision to anyone
The mountains melt like wax before the LORD, until the Son of Man has been raised from the dead.”
before the LORD of all the earth.
The heavens proclaim his justice, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
and all peoples see his glory.—R.
Because you, O LORD, are the Most High over all the earth,
exalted far above all gods.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Pt 1:16-19)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Peter:
BELOVED:
We did not follow cleverly devised myths
when we made known to you
the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
but we had been eyewitnesses of his majesty.
For he received honor and glory from God the Father
when that unique declaration came to him from the majestic glory,
“This is my Son, my beloved, with whom I am well pleased.”
We ourselves heard this voice come from heaven
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 253 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS while we were with him on the holy mountain.
TRANSFIGURATION OF THE LORD—B (August 6) Moreover, we possess the prophetic message that is altogether reliable.
You will do well to be attentive to it,
as to a lamp shining in a dark place,
FIRST READING (Dn 7:9-10, 13-14) until day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Daniel The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
AS I watched: ALLELUIA (Matthew 17:5c)
Thrones were set up R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and the Ancient One took his throne.
His clothing was bright as snow, This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased;
and the hair on his head as white as wool; listen to him.—R.
his throne was flames of fire,
with wheels of burning fire. GOSPEL (Mk 9:2-10)
A surging stream of fire
flowed out from where he sat; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Mark:
thousands upon thousands were ministering to him,
and myriads upon myriads attended him. JESUS took Peter, James, and his brother John,
The court was convened and the books were opened. and led them up a high mountain apart by themselves.
And he was transfigured before them,
As the visions during the night continued, I saw: and his clothes became dazzling white,
such as no fuller on earth could bleach them.
One like a Son of man coming, Then Elijah appeared to them along with Moses,
on the clouds of heaven; and they were conversing with Jesus.
When he reached the Ancient One Then Peter said to Jesus in reply,
and was presented before him, “Rabbi, it is good that we are here!
The one like a Son of man received dominion, glory, and kingship; Let us make three tents:
all peoples, nations, and languages serve him. one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
His dominion is an everlasting dominion He hardly knew what to say, they were so terrified.
that shall not be taken away, Then a cloud came, casting a shadow over them;
his kingship shall not be destroyed. from the cloud came a voice,
“This is my beloved Son. Listen to him.”
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Suddenly, looking around, they no longer saw anyone
but Jesus alone with them.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 97:1-2, 5-6, 9)
As they were coming down from the mountain,
R. (1a and 9a) The Lord is king, the Most High over all the earth. he charged them not to relate what they had seen to anyone,
except when the Son of Man had risen from the dead.
The LORD is king; let the earth rejoice; So they kept the matter to themselves,
let the many islands be glad. questioning what rising from the dead meant.
Clouds and darkness are round about him,
justice and judgment are the foundation of his throne.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The mountains melt like wax before the LORD,
before the LORD of all the earth.
The heavens proclaim his justice,
and all peoples see his glory.—R.
Because you, O LORD, are the Most High over all the earth,
exalted far above all gods.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Pt 1:16-19)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Peter:
BELOVED:
We did not follow cleverly devised myths
when we made known to you
the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
but we had been eyewitnesses of his majesty.
For he received honor and glory from God the Father
when that unique declaration came to him from the majestic glory,
“This is my Son, my beloved, with whom I am well pleased.”
We ourselves heard this voice come from heaven
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 254 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS while we were with him on the holy mountain.
TRANSFIGURATION OF THE LORD—C (August 6) Moreover, we possess the prophetic message that is altogether reliable.
You will do well to be attentive to it,
as to a lamp shining in a dark place,
FIRST READING (Dn 7:9-10, 13-14) until day dawns and the morning star rises in your hearts.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Daniel The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
AS I watched: ALLELUIA (Matthew 17:5c)
Thrones were set up R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and the Ancient One took his throne.
His clothing was bright as snow, This is my beloved Son, with whom I am well pleased;
and the hair on his head as white as wool; listen to him.—R.
his throne was flames of fire,
with wheels of burning fire. GOSPEL (Lk 9:28b-36)
A surging stream of fire
flowed out from where he sat; + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
thousands upon thousands were ministering to him,
and myriads upon myriads attended him. JESUS took Peter, John, and James
The court was convened and the books were opened. and went up a mountain to pray.
While he was praying his face changed in appearance
As the visions during the night continued, I saw: and his clothing became dazzling white.
And behold, two men were conversing with him, Moses and Elijah,
One like a Son of man coming, who appeared in glory and spoke of his exodus
on the clouds of heaven; that he was going to accomplish in Jerusalem.
When he reached the Ancient One Peter and his companions had been overcome by sleep,
and was presented before him, but becoming fully awake,
The one like a Son of man received dominion, glory, and kingship; they saw his glory and the two men standing with him.
all peoples, nations, and languages serve him. As they were about to part from him, Peter said to Jesus,
His dominion is an everlasting dominion “Master, it is good that we are here;
that shall not be taken away, let us make three tents,
his kingship shall not be destroyed. one for you, one for Moses, and one for Elijah.”
But he did not know what he was saying.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. While he was still speaking,
a cloud came and cast a shadow over them,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 97:1-2, 5-6, 9) and they became frightened when they entered the cloud.
Then from the cloud came a voice that said,
R. (1a and 9a) The Lord is king, the Most High over all the earth. “This is my chosen Son; listen to him.”
After the voice had spoken, Jesus was found alone.
The LORD is king; let the earth rejoice; They fell silent and did not at that time
let the many islands be glad. tell anyone what they had seen.
Clouds and darkness are round about him,
justice and judgment are the foundation of his throne.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
The mountains melt like wax before the LORD,
before the LORD of all the earth.
The heavens proclaim his justice,
and all peoples see his glory.—R.
Because you, O LORD, are the Most High over all the earth,
exalted far above all gods.—R.
SECOND READING (2 Pt 1:16-19)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Peter:
BELOVED:
We did not follow cleverly devised myths
when we made known to you
the power and coming of our Lord Jesus Christ,
but we had been eyewitnesses of his majesty.
For he received honor and glory from God the Father
when that unique declaration came to him from the majestic glory,
“This is my Son, my beloved, with whom I am well pleased.”
We ourselves heard this voice come from heaven
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 255 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS ALLELUIA (Luke 11:28)
ASSUMPTION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY (VIGIL)
—ABC (August 15) R. Alleluia, alleluia.
Blessed are they who hear the word of God and observe it.—R.
FIRST READING (1 Chr 15:3-4, 15-16; 16:1-2)
GOSPEL (Lk 11:27-28)
A reading from the first Book of Chronicles:
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
DAVID assembled all Israel in Jerusalem to bring the ark of the LORD
to the place which he had prepared for it. WHILE Jesus was speaking,
David also called together the sons of Aaron and the Levites. a woman from the crowd called out and said to him,
“Blessed is the womb that carried you
The Levites bore the ark of God on their shoulders with poles, and the breasts at which you nursed.”
as Moses had ordained according to the word of the LORD. He replied,
“Rather, blessed are those
David commanded the chiefs of the Levites who hear the word of God and observe it.”
to appoint their kinsmen as chanters,
to play on musical instruments, harps, lyres, and cymbals, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
to make a loud sound of rejoicing.
They brought in the ark of God and set it within the tent
which David had pitched for it.
Then they offered up burnt offerings and peace offerings to God.
When David had finished offering up the burnt offerings
and peace offerings,
he blessed the people in the name of the LORD.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 132:6-7, 9-10, 13-14)
R. (8) Lord, go up to the place of your rest,
you and the ark of your holiness.
Behold, we heard of it in Ephrathah;
we found it in the fields of Jaar.
Let us enter his dwelling,
let us worship at his footstool.—R.
May your priests be clothed with justice;
let your faithful ones shout merrily for joy.
For the sake of David your servant,
reject not the plea of your anointed.—R.
For the LORD has chosen Zion;
he prefers her for her dwelling.
“Zion is my resting place forever;
in her will I dwell, for I prefer her.”—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 15:54b-57)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
When that which is mortal clothes itself with immortality,
then the word that is written shall come about:
Death is swallowed up in victory.
Where, O death, is your victory?
Where, O death, is your sting?
The sting of death is sin,
and the power of sin is the law.
But thanks be to God who gives us the victory
through our Lord Jesus Christ.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 256 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS when he hands over the Kingdom to his God and Father,
ASSUMPTION OF THE BLESSED VIRGIN MARY (DAY) when he has destroyed every sovereignty
—ABC (August 15) and every authority and power.
For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet.
The last enemy to be destroyed is death,
FIRST READING (Rev 11:19a; 12:1-6a, 10ab) for “he subjected everything under his feet.”
A reading from the Book of Revelation: The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
GOD’S temple in heaven was opened, ALLELUIA
and the ark of his covenant could be seen in the temple.
R. Alleluia, alleluia.
A great sign appeared in the sky, a woman clothed with the sun,
with the moon under her feet, Mary is taken up to heaven;
and on her head a crown of twelve stars. a chorus of angels exults.—R.
She was with child and wailed aloud in pain as she labored to give birth.
Then another sign appeared in the sky; GOSPEL (Lk 1:39-56)
it was a huge red dragon, with seven heads and ten horns,
and on its heads were seven diadems. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
Its tail swept away a third of the stars in the sky
and hurled them down to the earth. MARY set out
Then the dragon stood before the woman about to give birth, and traveled to the hill country in haste
to devour her child when she gave birth. to a town of Judah,
She gave birth to a son, a male child, where she entered the house of Zechariah
destined to rule all the nations with an iron rod. and greeted Elizabeth.
Her child was caught up to God and his throne. When Elizabeth heard Mary’s greeting,
The woman herself fled into the desert the infant leaped in her womb,
where she had a place prepared by God. and Elizabeth, filled with the Holy Spirit,
cried out in a loud voice and said,
Then I heard a loud voice in heaven say: “Blessed are you among women,
“Now have salvation and power come, and blessed is the fruit of your womb.
and the Kingdom of our God And how does this happen to me,
and the authority of his Anointed One.” that the mother of my Lord should come to me?
For at the moment the sound of your greeting reached my ears,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. the infant in my womb leaped for joy.
Blessed are you who believed
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 45:10, 11, 12, 16) that what was spoken to you by the Lord
would be fulfilled.”
R. (10bc) The queen stands at your right hand, arrayed in gold.
And Mary said:
The queen takes her place at your right hand in gold of Ophir.—R.
“My soul proclaims the greatness of the Lord;
Hear, O daughter, and see; turn your ear, my spirit rejoices in God my Savior
forget your people and your father’s house.—R. for he has looked with favor on his lowly servant.
From this day all generations will call me blessed:
So shall the king desire your beauty; the Almighty has done great things for me
for he is your lord.—R. and holy is his Name.
He has mercy on those who fear him
They are borne in with gladness and joy; in every generation.
they enter the palace of the king.—R. He has shown the strength of his arm,
and has scattered the proud in their conceit.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 15:20-27) He has cast down the mighty from their thrones,
and has lifted up the lowly.
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians He has filled the hungry with good things,
and the rich he has sent away empty.
BROTHERS and sisters: He has come to the help of his servant Israel
Christ has been raised from the dead, for he has remembered his promise of mercy,
the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep. the promise he made to our fathers,
For since death came through man, to Abraham and his children forever.”
the resurrection of the dead came also through man.
For just as in Adam all die, Mary remained with her about three months
so too in Christ shall all be brought to life, and then returned to her home.
but each one in proper order:
Christ the firstfruits; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
then, at his coming, those who belong to Christ;
then comes the end,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 257 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Because of this, God greatly exalted him
EXALTATION OF THE HOLY CROSS—ABC (September 14) and bestowed on him the name
that is above every name,
that at the name of Jesus
FIRST READING (Nm 21:4b-9) every knee should bend,
of those in heaven and on earth and under the earth,
A reading from the Book of Numbers: and every tongue confess that
Jesus Christ is Lord,
WITH their patience worn out by the journey, to the glory of God the Father.
the people complained against God and Moses,
“Why have you brought us up from Egypt to die in this desert, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
where there is no food or water?
We are disgusted with this wretched food!” ALLELUIA
In punishment the LORD sent among the people saraph serpents, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
which bit the people so that many of them died.
Then the people came to Moses and said, We adore you, O Christ, and we bless you,
“We have sinned in complaining against the LORD and you. because by your Cross you have redeemed the world.—R.
Pray the LORD to take the serpents from us.”
So Moses prayed for the people, and the LORD said to Moses, GOSPEL (Jn 3:13-17)
“Make a saraph and mount it on a pole,
and if any who have been bitten look at it, they will live.” + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
Moses accordingly made a bronze serpent and mounted it on a pole,
and whenever anyone who had been bitten by a serpent JESUS said to Nicodemus:
looked at the bronze serpent, he lived. “No one has gone up to heaven
except the one who has come down from heaven, the Son of Man.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. And just as Moses lifted up the serpent in the desert,
so must the Son of Man be lifted up,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 78:1bc-2, 34-35, 36-37, 38) so that everyone who believes in him may have eternal life.”
R. (see 7b) Do not forget the works of the Lord! For God so loved the world that he gave his only Son,
so that everyone who believes in him might not perish
Hearken, my people, to my teaching; but might have eternal life.
incline your ears to the words of my mouth. For God did not send his Son into the world to condemn the world,
I will open my mouth in a parable, but that the world might be saved through him.
I will utter mysteries from of old.—R.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
While he slew them they sought him
and inquired after God again,
Remembering that God was their rock
and the Most High God, their redeemer.—R.
But they flattered him with their mouths
and lied to him with their tongues,
Though their hearts were not steadfast toward him,
nor were they faithful to his covenant.—R.
But he, being merciful, forgave their sin
and destroyed them not;
Often he turned back his anger
and let none of his wrath be roused.—R.
SECOND READING (Phil 2:6-11)
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
Christ Jesus, though he was in the form of God,
did not regard equality with God something to be grasped.
Rather, he emptied himself,
taking the form of a slave,
coming in human likeness;
and found human in appearance,
he humbled himself,
becoming obedient to death,
even death on a cross.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 258 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS SECOND READING (Jn 3:1-3)
ALL SAINTS—ABC (November 1)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint John:
FIRST READING (Rev 7:2-4, 9-14) BELOVED:
See what love the Father has bestowed on us
A reading from the Book of Revelation: that we may be called the children of God.
Yet so we are.
I, JOHN, saw another angel come up from the East, The reason the world does not know us
holding the seal of the living God. is that it did not know him.
He cried out in a loud voice to the four angels Beloved, we are God’s children now;
who were given power to damage the land and the sea, what we shall be has not yet been revealed.
“Do not damage the land or the sea or the trees We do know that when it is revealed we shall be like him,
until we put the seal on the foreheads of the servants of our God.” for we shall see him as he is.
I heard the number of those who had been marked with the seal, Everyone who has this hope based on him makes himself pure,
one hundred and forty-four thousand marked as he is pure.
from every tribe of the children of Israel.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
After this I had a vision of a great multitude,
which no one could count, ALLELUIA (Matthew 11:28)
from every nation, race, people, and tongue.
They stood before the throne and before the Lamb, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
wearing white robes and holding palm branches in their hands.
They cried out in a loud voice: Come to me, all you who labor and are burdened,
and I will give you rest, says the Lord.—R.
“Salvation comes from our God, who is seated on the throne,
and from the Lamb.” GOSPEL (Mt 5:1-12a)
All the angels stood around the throne + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
and around the elders and the four living creatures.
They prostrated themselves before the throne, WHEN Jesus saw the crowds, he went up the mountain,
worshiped God, and exclaimed: and after he had sat down, his disciples came to him.
He began to teach them, saying:
“Amen. Blessing and glory, wisdom and thanksgiving,
honor, power, and might “Blessed are the poor in spirit,
be to our God forever and ever. Amen.” for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are they who mourn,
Then one of the elders spoke up and said to me, for they will be comforted.
“Who are these wearing white robes, Blessed are the meek,
and where did they come from?” for they will inherit the land.
I said to him, “My lord, you are the one who knows.” Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness,
He said to me, for they will be satisfied.
“These are the ones who have survived the time of great distress; Blessed are the merciful,
they have washed their robes for they will be shown mercy.
and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb.” Blessed are the clean of heart,
for they will see God.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. Blessed are the peacemakers,
for they will be called children of God.
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 24:1bc-2, 3-4ab, 5-6) Blessed are they who are persecuted for the sake of righteousness,
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.
R. (see 6) Lord, this is the people that longs to see your face. Blessed are you when they insult you and persecute you
and utter every kind of evil against you falsely because of me.
The LORD’s are the earth and its fullness; Rejoice and be glad,
the world and those who dwell in it. for your reward will be great in heaven.”
For he founded it upon the seas
and established it upon the rivers.—R. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
Who can ascend the mountain of the LORD?
or who may stand in his holy place?
One whose hands are sinless, whose heart is clean,
who desires not what is vain.—R.
He shall receive a blessing from the LORD,
a reward from God his savior.
Such is the race that seeks him,
that seeks the face of the God of Jacob.—R.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 259 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS 3. (Is 25:6, 7-9)
COMMEMORATION OF ALL THE FAITHFUL DEPARTED
(ALL SOULS)—ABC (November 2) A reading from the Book of the Prophet Isaiah:
Any of the following readings may be used. ON this mountain the LORD of hosts
will provide for all peoples.
On this mountain he will destroy
FIRST READING the veil that veils all peoples,
The web that is woven over all nations;
1. (Wis 3:1-9) he will destroy death forever.
The Lord GOD will wipe away
A reading from the Book of Wisdom: the tears from all faces;
The reproach of his people he will remove
THE souls of the just are in the hand of God, from the whole earth; for the LORD has spoken.
and no torment shall touch them. On that day it will be said:
They seemed, in the view of the foolish, to be dead; "Behold our God, to whom we looked to save us!
and their passing away was thought an affliction This is the LORD for whom we looked;
and their going forth from us, utter destruction. let us rejoice and be glad that he has saved us!"
But they are in peace.
For if before men, indeed, they be punished, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
yet is their hope full of immortality;
chastised a little, they shall be greatly blessed, RESPONSORIAL PSALM
because God tried them
and found them worthy of himself. 1. (Psalm 23:1-3a, 3b-4, 5, 6)
As gold in the furnace, he proved them,
and as sacrificial offerings he took them to himself. R. (1) The Lord is my shepherd; there is nothing I shall want.
In the time of their visitation they shall shine, or:
and shall dart about as sparks through stubble; R. Though I walk in the valley of darkness, I fear no evil,
they shall judge nations and rule over peoples, for you are with me.
and the LORD shall be their King forever.
Those who trust in him shall understand truth, The LORD is my shepherd; I shall not want.
and the faithful shall abide with him in love: In verdant pastures he gives me repose;
because grace and mercy are with his holy ones, beside restful waters he leads me;
and his care is with his elect. he refreshes my soul.—R.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. He guides me in right paths
for his name's sake.
2. (Wis 4:7-14) Even though I walk in the dark valley
I fear no evil; for you are at my side
A reading from the Book of Wisdom: with your rod and your staff
that give me courage.—R.
THE just man, though he die early,
shall be at rest. You spread the table before me
For the age that is honorable comes not with the passing of time, in the sight of my foes;
nor can it be measured in terms of years. You anoint my head with oil;
Rather, understanding is the hoary crown for men, my cup overflows.—R.
and an unsullied life, the attainment of old age.
He who pleased God was loved; Only goodness and kindness follow me
he who lived among sinners was transported– all the days of my life;
Snatched away, lest wickedness pervert his mind and I shall dwell in the house of the LORD
or deceit beguile his soul; for years to come.—R.
For the witchery of paltry things obscures what is right
and the whirl of desire transforms the innocent mind. 2. (Psalm 25:6 and 7b, 17-18, 20-21)
Having become perfect in a short while,
he reached the fullness of a long career; R. (1) To you, O Lord, I lift my soul.
for his soul was pleasing to the LORD, or:
therefore he sped him out of the midst of wickedness. R. (3a) No one who waits for you, O Lord, will ever be put to shame.
But the people saw and did not understand,
nor did they take this into account. Remember that your compassion, O LORD,
and your kindness are from of old.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. In your kindness remember me,
because of your goodness, O LORD.—R.
Relieve the troubles of my heart,
-1-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 260 ---
and bring me out of my distress.
Put an end to my affliction and my suffering; The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
and take away all my sins.—R.
2. (Rom 5:17-21)
Preserve my life, and rescue me;
let me not be put to shame, for I take refuge in you. A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
Let integrity and uprightness preserve me,
because I wait for you, O LORD.—R. BROTHERS and sisters:
If, by the transgression of the one,
3. (Psalm 27:1, 4, 7 and 8b and 9a, 13-14) death came to reign through that one,
how much more will those who receive the abundance of grace
R. (1) The Lord is my light and my salvation. and of the gift of justification
or: come to reign in life through the one Jesus Christ.
R. (13) I believe that I shall see the good things of the Lord In conclusion, just as through one transgression
in the land of the living. condemnation came upon all,
so, through one righteous act,
The LORD is my light and my salvation; acquittal and life came to all.
whom should I fear? For just as through the disobedience of the one man
The LORD is my life's refuge; the many were made sinners,
of whom should I be afraid?—R. so through the obedience of one
the many will be made righteous.
One thing I ask of the LORD; The law entered in so that transgression might increase
this I seek: but, where sin increased, grace overflowed all the more, so that,
To dwell in the house of the LORD as sin reigned in death,
all the days of my life, grace also might reign through justification for eternal life
That I may gaze on the loveliness of the LORD through Jesus Christ our Lord.
and contemplate his temple.—R.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
Hear, O LORD, the sound of my call;
have pity on me and answer me. 3. (Rom 6:3-9)
Your presence, O LORD, I seek.
Hide not your face from me.—R. A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
I believe that I shall see the bounty of the LORD BROTHERS and sisters:
in the land of the living. Are you unaware that we who were baptized into Christ Jesus
Wait for the LORD with courage; were baptized into his death?
be stouthearted, and wait for the LORD!—R. We were indeed buried with him through baptism into death,
so that, just as Christ was raised from the dead
SECOND READING by the glory of the Father,
we too might live in newness of life.
1. (Rom 5:5-11)
For if we have grown into union with him through a death like his,
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: we shall also be united with him in the resurrection.
We know that our old self was crucified with him,
BROTHERS and sisters: so that our sinful body might be done away with,
Hope does not disappoint, that we might no longer be in slavery to sin.
because the love of God has been poured out into our hearts For a dead person has been absolved from sin.
through the Holy Spirit that has been given to us. If, then, we have died with Christ,
For Christ, while we were still helpless, we believe that we shall also live with him.
died at the appointed time for the ungodly. We know that Christ, raised from the dead, dies no more;
Indeed, only with difficulty does one die for a just person, death no longer has power over him.
though perhaps for a good person
one might even find courage to die. The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
But God proves his love for us
in that while we were still sinners Christ died for us. 4. (Rom 8:14-23)
How much more then, since we are now justified by his Blood,
will we be saved through him from the wrath. A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans:
Indeed, if, while we were enemies,
we were reconciled to God through the death of his Son, BROTHERS and sisters:
how much more, once reconciled, Those who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God.
will we be saved by his life. For you did not receive a spirit of slavery to fall back into fear,
Not only that, but you received a spirit of adoption,
but we also boast of God through our Lord Jesus Christ, through which we cry, "Abba, Father!"
through whom we have now received reconciliation. The Spirit itself bears witness with our spirit
-2-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 261 ---
that we are children of God, Why then do you judge your brother?
and if children, then heirs, Or you, why do you look down on your brother?
heirs of God and joint heirs with Christ, For we shall all stand before the judgment seat of God;
if only we suffer with him for it is written:
so that we may also be glorified with him.
As I live, says the Lord, every knee shall bend before me,
I consider that the sufferings of this present time are as nothing and every tongue shall give praise to God.
compared with the glory to be revealed for us.
For creation awaits with eager expectation So then each of us shall give an account of himself to God.
the revelation of the children of God;
for creation was made subject to futility, The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
not of its own accord but because of the one who subjected it,
in hope that creation itself 7. (1 Cor 15:20-28)
would be set free from slavery to corruption
and share in the glorious freedom of the children of God. A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
We know that all creation is groaning in labor pains even until now;
and not only that, but we ourselves, BROTHERS and sisters:
who have the firstfruits of the Spirit, Christ has been raised from the dead,
we also groan within ourselves the firstfruits of those who have fallen asleep.
as we wait for adoption, the redemption of our bodies. For since death came through a human being,
the resurrection of the dead came also through a human being.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. For just as in Adam all die,
so too in Christ shall all be brought to life,
5. (Rom 8:31b-35, 37-39) but each one in proper order:
Christ the firstfruits;
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: then, at his coming, those who belong to Christ;
then comes the end,
BROTHERS and sisters: when he hands over the Kingdom to his God and Father.
If God is for us, who can be against us?
He who did not spare his own Son For he must reign until he has put all his enemies under his feet.
but handed him over for us all, The last enemy to be destroyed is death,
will he not also give us everything else along with him? for "he subjected everything under his feet."
Who will bring a charge against God's chosen ones? But when it says that everything has been subjected,
It is God who acquits us. it is clear that it excludes the one who subjected everything
Who will condemn? to him.
It is Christ Jesus who died, rather, was raised, When everything is subjected to him,
who also is at the right hand of God, then the Son himself will also be subjected
who indeed intercedes for us. to the one who subjected everything to him,
What will separate us from the love of Christ? so that God may be all in all.
Will anguish, or distress or persecution, or famine,
or nakedness, or peril, or the sword? The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
No, in all these things, we conquer overwhelmingly 8. (1 Cor 15:51-57)
through him who loved us.
For I am convinced that neither death, nor life, A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
nor angels, nor principalities,
nor present things, nor future things, BROTHERS and sisters:
nor powers, nor height, nor depth, Behold, I tell you a mystery.
nor any other creature will be able to separate us We shall not all fall asleep, but we will all be changed,
from the love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord. in an instant, in the blink of an eye, at the last trumpet.
For the trumpet will sound,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. the dead will be raised incorruptible,
and we shall be changed.
6. (Rom 14:7-9, 10c-12) For that which is corruptible must clothe itself with incorruptibility,
and that which is mortal must clothe itself with immortality.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Romans: And when this which is corruptible clothes itself with incorruptibility
and this which is mortal clothes itself with immortality,
BROTHERS and sisters: then the word that is written shall come about:
None of us lives for oneself, and no one dies for oneself.
For if we live, we live for the Lord, Death is swallowed up in victory.
and if we die, we die for the Lord; Where, O death, is your victory?
so then, whether we live or die, we are the Lord's. Where, O death, is your sting?
For this is why Christ died and came to life,
that he might be Lord of both the dead and the living. The sting of death is sin,
-3-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 262 ---
and the power of sin is the law. and from it we also await a savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.
But thanks be to God who gives us the victory He will change our lowly body
through our Lord Jesus Christ. to conform with his glorified Body
by the power that enables him also
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. to bring all things into subjection to himself.
9. (2 Cor 4:14–5:1) The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians: 12. (1 Thes 4:13-18)
BROTHERS and sisters: A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Thessalonians:
We know that the One who raised the Lord Jesus
will raise us also with Jesus WE do not want you to be unaware, brothers and sisters,
and place us with you in his presence. about those who have fallen asleep,
Everything indeed is for you, so that you may not grieve like the rest, who have no hope.
so that the grace bestowed in abundance on more and more For if we believe that Jesus died and rose,
people so too will God, through Jesus,
may cause the thanksgiving to overflow for the glory of God. bring with him those who have fallen asleep.
Therefore, we are not discouraged; Indeed, we tell you this, on the word of the Lord,
rather, although our outer self is wasting away, that we who are alive,
our inner self is being renewed day by day. who are left until the coming of the Lord,
For this momentary light affliction will surely not precede those who have fallen asleep.
is producing for us an eternal weight of glory For the Lord himself, with a word of command,
beyond all comparison, with the voice of an archangel and with the trumpet of God,
as we look not to what is seen but to what is unseen; will come down from heaven,
for what is seen is transitory, but what is unseen is eternal. and the dead in Christ will rise first.
For we know that if our earthly dwelling, a tent, Then we who are alive, who are left,
should be destroyed, will be caught up together with them in the clouds
we have a building from God, to meet the Lord in the air.
a dwelling not made with hands, eternal in heaven. Thus we shall always be with the Lord.
Therefore, console one another with these words.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
10. (2 Cor 5:1, 6-10)
13. (2 Tm 2:8-13)
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
A reading from the second Letter of Saint Paul to Timothy:
BROTHERS and sisters:
We know that if our earthly dwelling, a tent, BELOVED:
should be destroyed, Remember Jesus Christ, raised from the dead, a descendant of David:
we have a building from God, such is my Gospel, for which I am suffering,
a dwelling not made with hands, even to the point of chains, like a criminal.
eternal in heaven. But the word of God is not chained.
Therefore, I bear with everything for the sake of those who are
We are always courageous, chosen,
although we know that while we are at home in the body so that they too may obtain the salvation that is in Christ Jesus,
we are away from the Lord, together with eternal glory.
for we walk by faith, not by sight. This saying is trustworthy:
Yet we are courageous,
and we would rather leave the body and go home to the Lord. If we have died with him
Therefore, we aspire to please him, we shall also live with him;
whether we are at home or away. if we persevere
For we must all appear before the judgment seat of Christ, we shall also reign with him.
so that each one may receive recompense, But if we deny him
according to what he did in the body, whether good or evil. he will deny us.
If we are unfaithful
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. he remains faithful,
for he cannot deny himself.
11. (Phil 3:20-21)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Philippians:
ALLELUIA VERSE and VERSE BEFORE THE GOSPEL
BROTHERS and sisters:
Our citizenship is in heaven, [ R. Alleluia, alleluia. ]
-4-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 263 ---
1. (Matthew 25:34) for your reward will be great in heaven."
Come, you who are blessed by my Father; The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
inherit the kingdom prepared for you
from the foundation of the world. 2. (Mt 11:25-30)
[ —R. Alleluia, alleluia. ]
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
2. (See John 3:16) AT that time Jesus exclaimed:
"I give praise to you, Father, Lord of heaven and earth,
God so loved the world that he gave us his only Son, for although you have hidden these things
that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him from the wise and the learned
may have eternal life. [ —R. Alleluia, alleluia. ] you have revealed them to little ones.
Yes, Father, such has been your gracious will.
3. (See John 6:40) All things have been handed over to me by my Father.
No one knows the Son except the Father,
This is the will of my Father, says the Lord, and no one knows the Father except the Son
that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him and anyone to whom the Son wishes to reveal him.
may have eternal life. [ —R. Alleluia, alleluia. ]
"Come to me, all you who labor and are burdened,
4. (John 6:51) and I will give you rest.
Take my yoke upon you and learn from me,
I am the living bread that came down from heaven, for I am meek and humble of heart;
says the Lord; and you will find rest for yourselves.
whoever eats this bread will live forever. For my yoke is easy, and my burden light."
[ —R. Alleluia, alleluia. ]
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
5. (John 11:25a, 26)
3. (Mt 25:31-46)
I am the resurrection and the life, says the Lord;
whoever believes in me will never die. + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew:
[ —R. Alleluia, alleluia. ]
JESUS said to his disciples:
GOSPEL "When the Son of Man comes in his glory,
and all the angels with him,
1. (Mt 5:1-12a) he will sit upon his glorious throne,
and all the nations will be assembled before him.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Matthew: And he will separate them one from another,
as a shepherd separates the sheep from the goats.
WHEN Jesus saw the crowds, he went up the mountain, He will place the sheep on his right and the goats on his left.
and after he had sat down, his disciples came to him. Then the king will say to those on his right,
He began to teach them, saying: ‘Come, you who are blessed by my Father.
Inherit the kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of
"Blessed are the poor in spirit, the world.
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. For I was hungry and you gave me food,
Blessed are they who mourn, I was thirsty and you gave me drink,
for they will be comforted. a stranger and you welcomed me,
Blessed are the meek, naked and you clothed me,
for they will inherit the land. ill and you cared for me,
Blessed are they who hunger and thirst for righteousness, in prison and you visited me.'
for they will be satisfied. Then the righteous will answer him and say,
Blessed are the merciful, ‘Lord, when did we see you hungry and feed you,
for they will be shown mercy. or thirsty and give you drink?
Blessed are the clean of heart, When did we see you a stranger and welcome you,
for they will see God. or naked and clothe you?
Blessed are the peacemakers, When did we see you ill or in prison, and visit you?'
for they will be called children of God. And the king will say to them in reply,
Blessed are they who are persecuted for the sake of ‘Amen, I say to you, whatever you did
righteousness, for one of these least brothers of mine, you did for me.'
for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven.
Blessed are you when they insult you and persecute you "Then he will say to those on his left,
and utter every kind of evil against you falsely because ‘Depart from me, you accursed,
of me. into the eternal fire prepared for the Devil and his angels.
Rejoice and be glad, For I was hungry and you gave me no food,
-5-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 264 ---
I was thirsty and you gave me no drink, and went to the tomb.
a stranger and you gave me no welcome, They found the stone rolled away from the tomb;
naked and you gave me no clothing, but when they entered,
ill and in prison, and you did not care for me.' they did not find the Body of the Lord Jesus.
Then they will answer and say, While they were puzzling over this, behold,
‘Lord, when did we see you hungry or thirsty two men in dazzling garments appeared to them.
or a stranger or naked or ill or in prison, They were terrified and bowed their faces to the ground.
and not minister to your needs?' They said to them,
He will answer them, ‘Amen, I say to you, "Why do you seek the living one among the dead?
what you did not do for one of the least of these, He is not here, but he has been raised."
you did not do for me.'
And these will go off to eternal punishment, The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
but the righteous to eternal life."
6. (Lk 24:13-16, 28-35)
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
4. (Lk 7:11-17)
THAT very day, the first day of the week,
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke: two of Jesus' disciples were going
to a village seven miles from Jerusalem called Emmaus,
JESUS journeyed to a city called Nain, and they were conversing about all the things that had occurred.
and his disciples and a large crowd accompanied him. And it happened that while they were conversing and debating,
As he drew near to the gate of the city, Jesus himself drew near and walked with them,
a man who had died was being carried out, but their eyes were prevented from recognizing him.
the only son of his mother, and she was a widow. As they approached the village to which they were going,
A large crowd from the city was with her. he gave the impression that he was going on farther.
When the Lord saw her, But they urged him, "Stay with us,
he was moved with pity for her and said to her, for it is nearly evening and the day is almost over."
"Do not weep." So he went in to stay with them.
He stepped forward and touched the coffin; And it happened that, while he was with them at table,
at this the bearers halted, he took bread, said the blessing,
and he said, "Young man, I tell you, arise!" broke it, and gave it to them.
The dead man sat up and began to speak, With that their eyes were opened and they recognized him,
and Jesus gave him to his mother. but he vanished from their sight.
Fear seized them all, and they glorified God, exclaiming, Then they said to each other,
"A great prophet has arisen in our midst," "Were not our hearts burning within us
and "God has visited his people." while he spoke to us on the way and opened the Scriptures
This report about him spread through the whole of Judea to us?"
and in all the surrounding region. So they set out at once and returned to Jerusalem
where they found gathered together
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ. the Eleven and those with them who were saying,
"The Lord has truly been raised and has appeared to Simon!"
5. (Lk 23:44-46, 50, 52-53; 24:1-6a) Then the two recounted to them
what had taken place on the way
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke: and how he was made known to them in the breaking of bread.
IT was about noon and darkness came over the whole land The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
until three in the afternoon
because of an eclipse of the sun. 7. (Jn 5:24-29)
Then the veil of the temple was torn down the middle.
Jesus cried out in a loud voice, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
"Father, into your hands I commend my spirit";
and when he had said this he breathed his last. JESUS answered the Jews and said to them:
"Amen, amen, I say to you, whoever hears my word
Now there was a virtuous and righteous man named Joseph who, and believes in the one who sent me
though he was a member of the council, has eternal life and will not come to condemnation,
went to Pilate and asked for the Body of Jesus. but has passed from death to life.
After he had taken the Body down, Amen, amen, I say to you, the hour is coming and is now here
he wrapped it in a linen cloth when the dead will hear the voice of the Son of God,
and laid him in a rock-hewn tomb and those who hear will live.
in which no one had yet been buried. For just as the Father has life in himself,
so also he gave to his Son the possession of life in himself.
At daybreak on the first day of the week And he gave him power to exercise judgment,
they took the spices they had prepared because he is the Son of Man.
-6-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 265 ---
Do not be amazed at this, 10. (Jn 11:17-27)
because the hour is coming in which all who are in the tombs
will hear his voice and will come out, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
those who have done good deeds
to the resurrection of life, WHEN Jesus arrived in Bethany,
but those who have done wicked deeds he found that Lazarus had already been in the tomb
to the resurrection of condemnation." for four days.
Now Bethany was near Jerusalem, only about two miles away.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ. And many of the Jews had come to Martha and Mary
to comfort them about their brother.
8. (Jn 6:37-40) When Martha heard that Jesus was coming,
she went to meet him;
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John: but Mary sat at home.
Martha said to Jesus,
JESUS said to the crowds: "Lord, if you had been here,
"Everything that the Father gives me will come to me, my brother would not have died.
and I will not reject anyone who comes to me, But even now I know that whatever you ask of God,
because I came down from heaven not to do my own will God will give you."
but the will of the one who sent me. Jesus said to her,
And this is the will of the one who sent me, "Your brother will rise."
that I should not lose anything of what he gave me, Martha said to him,
but that I should raise it on the last day. "I know he will rise,
For this is the will of my Father, in the resurrection on the last day."
that everyone who sees the Son and believes in him Jesus told her,
may have eternal life, "I am the resurrection and the life;
and I shall raise him on the last day." he who believes in me, even if he dies, will live,
and everyone who lives and believes in me will never die.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ. Do you believe this?"
She said to him, "Yes, Lord.
9. (Jn 6:51-58) I have come to believe that you are the Christ, the Son of God,
the one who is coming into the world."
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
JESUS said to the crowds:
"I am the living bread that came down from heaven; 11. (Jn 11:32-45)
whoever eats this bread will live forever;
and the bread that I will give is my Flesh + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
for the life of the world."
WHEN Mary, the sister of Lazarus, came to where Jesus was
The Jews quarreled among themselves, saying, and saw him,
"How can this man give us his Flesh to eat?" she fell at his feet and said to him,
Jesus said to them, "Lord, if you had been here,
"Amen, amen, I say to you, my brother would not have died."
unless you eat the Flesh of the Son of Man and drink his Blood, When Jesus saw her weeping and the Jews who had come
you do not have life within you. with her weeping,
He who eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood he became perturbed and deeply troubled, and said,
has eternal life, "Where have you laid him?"
and I will raise him on the last day. They said to him, "Sir, come and see."
For my Flesh is true food, And Jesus wept.
and my Blood is true drink. So the Jews said, "See how he loved him."
Whoever eats my Flesh and drinks my Blood But some of them said,
remains in me and I in him. "Could not the one who opened the eyes of the blind man
Just as the living Father sent me have done something so that this man would not have died?"
and I have life because of the Father,
so also whoever feeds on me So Jesus, perturbed again, came to the tomb.
will have life because of me. It was a cave, and a stone lay across it.
This is the bread that came down from heaven. Jesus said, "Take away the stone."
Unlike your ancestors who ate and still died, Martha, the dead man's sister, said to him,
whoever eats this bread will live forever." "Lord, by now there will be a stench;
he has been dead for four days."
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ. Jesus said to her,
"Did I not tell you that if you believe
you will see the glory of God?"
So they took away the stone.
-7-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 266 ---
And Jesus raised his eyes and said,
"Father, I thank you for hearing me.
I know that you always hear me;
but because of the crowd here I have said this,
that they may believe that you sent me."
And when he had said this,
he cried out in a loud voice,
"Lazarus, come out!"
The dead man came out,
tied hand and foot with burial bands,
and his face was wrapped in a cloth.
So Jesus said to them,
"Untie him and let him go."
Now many of the Jews who had come to Mary
and seen what he had done began to believe in him.
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
12. (Jn 14:1-6)
+ A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
JESUS said to his disciples:
"Do not let your hearts be troubled.
You have faith in God; have faith also in me.
In my Father's house there are many dwelling places.
If there were not,
would I have told you that I am going to prepare
a place for you?
And if I go and prepare a place for you,
I will come back again and take you to myself,
so that where I am you also may be.
Where I am going you know the way."
Thomas said to him,
"Master, we do not know where you are going;
how can we know the way?"
Jesus said to him, "I am the way and the truth and the life.
No one comes to the Father except through me."
The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
-8-
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 267 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS Do you not know that you are the temple of God,
DEDICATION OF ST. JOHN LATERAN BASILICA and that the Spirit of God dwells in you?
—ABC (November 9) If anyone destroys God’s temple,
God will destroy that person;
for the temple of God, which you are, is holy.
FIRST READING (Ez 47:1-2, 8-9, 12)
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
A reading from the Book of the Prophet Ezekiel:
ALLELUIA (2 Chronicles 7:16)
THE angel brought me
back to the entrance of the temple, R. Alleluia, alleluia.
and I saw water flowing out
from beneath the threshold of the temple toward the east, I have chosen and consecrated this house, says the Lord,
for the façade of the temple was toward the east; that my name may be there forever.—R.
the water flowed down from the southern side of the temple,
south of the altar. GOSPEL (Jn 2:13-22)
He led me outside by the north gate,
and around to the outer gate facing the east, + A reading from the holy Gospel according to John:
where I saw water trickling from the southern side.
He said to me, SINCE the Passover of the Jews was near,
“This water flows into the eastern district down upon the Arabah, Jesus went up to Jerusalem.
and empties into the sea, the salt waters, which it makes fresh. He found in the temple area those who sold oxen, sheep, and doves,
Wherever the river flows, as well as the money-changers seated there.
every sort of living creature that can multiply shall live, He made a whip out of cords
and there shall be abundant fish, and drove them all out of the temple area, with the sheep and oxen,
for wherever this water comes the sea shall be made fresh. and spilled the coins of the money-changers
Along both banks of the river, fruit trees of every kind shall grow; and overturned their tables,
their leaves shall not fade, nor their fruit fail. and to those who sold doves he said,
Every month they shall bear fresh fruit, “Take these out of here,
for they shall be watered by the flow from the sanctuary. and stop making my Father’s house a marketplace.”
Their fruit shall serve for food, and their leaves for medicine.” His disciples recalled the words of Scripture,
Zeal for your house will consume me.
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. At this the Jews answered and said to him,
“What sign can you show us for doing this?”
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 46:2-3, 5-6, 8-9) Jesus answered and said to them,
“Destroy this temple and in three days I will raise it up.”
R. (5) The waters of the river gladden the city of God, The Jews said,
the holy dwelling of the Most High! “This temple has been under construction for forty-six years,
and you will raise it up in three days?”
God is our refuge and our strength, But he was speaking about the temple of his Body.
an ever-present help in distress. Therefore, when he was raised from the dead,
Therefore, we fear not, though the earth be shaken his disciples remembered that he had said this,
and mountains plunge into the depths of the sea.—R. and they came to believe the Scripture
and the word Jesus had spoken.
There is a stream whose runlets gladden the city of God,
the holy dwelling of the Most High. The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
God is in its midst; it shall not be disturbed;
God will help it at the break of dawn.—R.
The LORD of hosts is with us;
our stronghold is the God of Jacob.
Come! behold the deeds of the LORD,
the astounding things he has wrought on earth.—R.
SECOND READING (1 Cor 3:9c-11, 16-17)
A reading from the first Letter of Saint Paul to the Corinthians:
BROTHERS and sisters:
You are God’s building.
According to the grace of God given to me,
like a wise master builder I laid a foundation,
and another is building upon it.
But each one must be careful how he builds upon it,
for no one can lay a foundation other than the one that is there,
namely, Jesus Christ.
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

--- PAGE 268 ---
CATHOLIC SUNDAY READINGS as he chose us in him, before the foundation of the world,
IMMACULATE CONCEPTION—ABC (December 8) to be holy and without blemish before him.
In love he destined us for adoption to himself through Jesus Christ,
in accord with the favor of his will,
FIRST READING (Gn 3:9-15, 20) for the praise of the glory of his grace
that he granted us in the beloved.
A reading from the Book of Genesis:
In him we were also chosen,
AFTER the man, Adam, had eaten of the tree, destined in accord with the purpose of the One
the LORD God called to the man and asked him, “Where are you?” who accomplishes all things according to the intention of his will,
He answered, “I heard you in the garden; so that we might exist for the praise of his glory,
but I was afraid, because I was naked, we who first hoped in Christ.
so I hid myself.”
Then he asked, “Who told you that you were naked? The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God.
You have eaten, then,
from the tree of which I had forbidden you to eat!” ALLELUIA (See Luke 1:28)
The man replied, “The woman whom you put here with me—
she gave me fruit from the tree, and so I ate it.” R. Alleluia, alleluia.
The LORD God then asked the woman,
“Why did you do such a thing?” Hail, Mary, full of grace, the Lord is with you;
The woman answered, “The serpent tricked me into it, so I ate it.” blessed are you among women.—R.
Then the LORD God said to the serpent: GOSPEL (Lk 1:26-38)
“Because you have done this, you shall be banned
from all the animals + A reading from the holy Gospel according to Luke:
and from all the wild creatures;
on your belly shall you crawl, THE angel Gabriel was sent from God
and dirt shall you eat to a town of Galilee called Nazareth,
all the days of your life. to a virgin betrothed to a man named Joseph,
I will put enmity between you and the woman, of the house of David,
and between your offspring and hers; and the virgin’s name was Mary.
he will strike at your head, And coming to her, he said,
while you strike at his heel.” “Hail, full of grace! The Lord is with you.”
But she was greatly troubled at what was said
The man called his wife Eve, and pondered what sort of greeting this might be.
because she became the mother of all the living. Then the angel said to her,
“Do not be afraid, Mary,
The word of the Lord.—R. Thanks be to God. for you have found favor with God.
Behold, you will conceive in your womb and bear a son,
RESPONSORIAL PSALM (Psalm 98:1, 2-3ab, 3cd-4) and you shall name him Jesus.
He will be great and will be called Son of the Most High,
R. (1) Sing to the Lord a new song, for he has done marvelous deeds. and the Lord God will give him the throne of David his father,
and he will rule over the house of Jacob forever,
Sing to the LORD a new song, and of his Kingdom there will be no end.”
for he has done wondrous deeds; But Mary said to the angel,
His right hand has won victory for him, “How can this be,
his holy arm.—R. since I have no relations with a man?”
And the angel said to her in reply,
The LORD has made his salvation known: “The Holy Spirit will come upon you,
in the sight of the nations he has revealed his justice. and the power of the Most High will overshadow you.
He has remembered his kindness and his faithfulness Therefore the child to be born
toward the house of Israel.—R. will be called holy, the Son of God.
And behold, Elizabeth, your relative,
All the ends of the earth have seen has also conceived a son in her old age,
the salvation by our God. and this is the sixth month for her who was called barren;
Sing joyfully to the LORD, all you lands; for nothing will be impossible for God.”
break into song; sing praise.—R. Mary said, “Behold, I am the handmaid of the Lord.
May it be done to me according to your word.”
SECOND READING (Eph 1:3-6, 11-12) Then the angel departed from her.
A reading from the Letter of Saint Paul to the Ephesians: The Gospel of the Lord.—R. Praise to you, Lord Jesus Christ.
BROTHERS and sisters:
Blessed be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ,
who has blessed us in Christ
with every spiritual blessing in the heavens,
Text copyright Confraternity of Christian Doctrine, Inc., Washington, D.C. All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission.
See "Catholic Religious Support Handbook" for full copyright notice and use restrictions.

